courses and the admission criteria for licensure, which is your pathway to registration. There's a we present the following frameworks as critical methods and ways of examining the profession.

So So does the profession continue to meet these professional standards or have we failed? And how should we allow these structures to evolve?

So I suggest that for the traits model, consider placing the registered architect in the centre and adding these five traits around it in your diagrams as a way to think about, well where are these where are these five traits?

Where can I find evidence of them? What do I need to connect to demonstrate that these things are all related to one another? So you can do the basic, you literally just put them around and then you would start going right what and we'll give you these ideas within the lectures it also requires you to go look up these websites and go right so what is it that they're speaking about how do I find evidence of regulation?

What does that look like? And you might even put them in a different order as to which one you think is most important. Some people might think that you know being autonomous is the most important, some people might think that altruism is.

And recognise that each of the, you know, between universities, between the architects act, between individual practices. People have different ideas of what's most important. So for the university, we would be privileging higher learning.

You know, we think that that part is the most important. Um and we probably would say altruism. To act on behalf of another, to act for the person who is not in the room, to act for the meta client and the public.

Um but perhaps in the practice if that was the way, you know, the AIA perhaps might not put the h higher learning as um important, they might think that disciplinary knowledge is the most important.

It's up to you guys to decide for yourselves what you think is most important. But that's the act of doing this assessment. Yep. So I will go through that right now and if you've got that same question again, please before asking again.

Yeah. Okay. So this is an extract from the readings that you all have readone. And he's talking about all professions. And he describes it as a profession is a disciplined group of individuals who adhere to ethical standards and hold themselves out as and are accepted by the public as possessing special knowledge.

It is inherent in the definition of a profession that a code of ethics must govern the activities of each profession. Such codes require behavio andur practice beyond the personal moral obligation of an individual.

They define and demand high standards of behaviour in respect to the services provided to the public and in dealing with professional colleagues. Further, these codes are enforced by the profession, they're acknowledged and accepted by the community.

So what then, if anything, distinguishes a profession from say a trade or a craft? Skills in a widely recognised body of learning derived from research, education and training at a high level and are people who are prepared to apply this knowledge and exercise their skills in the interests of others.

This is very different to what a business of architecture might think. And this is very different to what an individual architect might think.

But you can hold those two ideas together. You can be an individual architect and also be making decisions on behalf of the entire profession. What's good for you might not be good for everyone, and what's good for everyone might not always be good for an individual practice, but in balance are we considering both?

I doubt anybody came into architecture just to make lots of honey, to design lots of amazing buildings that nobody goes inside but that they can exercise their um you know creative skills.

You might have chosen something slightly different, which would have made you more money, made you much more powerful. So there is something where there's a balance between all of these, and it might not be the high highest priority equally.

But I think it's worth thinking about that as you go through this subject and as you go into the profession. So the first one, which is quite straightforward, is self-regulation.

Regulation in the architecture profession is obvious. There's a clear set of complex systems being managed through laws by the government. So ARBV is legislation.

It has the architects Act within it, and that also has the Architects Regulation within that. Other laws that we adhere to are the code of tendering, and that's not just for architecture.

Anytime something goes out to tender, which is when a building or services goes out for costing, we must act within that code of tendering.

We're also governed by the Competition and Consumer Act, because we're businesses. We are also governed by the Architects Award, which is Fair Work. And so these things sit outside of architecture but impact everything that we do.

So the ARBV helps oversee architects registrations, they enforce the regulations and then they make sure that there is insurance. So that insurance is part of the Act.

We'll go into more detail later on in each of these, but this is just an introduction to all of that. Employment law, Common Law, Competition and Consumer Act, and building contracts, they all play a role.

And non-architect specific regulations such as international standards and university accreditation also affect what we do. So we'll have the ARBB come and speak next week.

And in the past, they used to speak more about architects as being a restrictive term. You can't be called an architect unless you have done registration.

Excluding unqualified individuals like building designers and draft people. And the rhetoric was always it was serving consumer protection.

However, we would argue that rather than thinking about the act and the registration process as simply something that limits the use, what if we consider them as a definition of how architects should act collectively?

Representing a group with shared competence, responsibilities, and legal protections. So instead of saying we're fine, we're doing really well, we just don't want other people in our restricted type, we might consider well now that we have this title, if people think that we are um acting on behalf of the public, what should we be doing and are we doing this well?

And if we're not doing this well, we should be working this out collectively together, rather than focusing on excluding people from the term architect. So one is an expansive way of thinking about it, the other one is an exclusionary way.

And it seems subtle, but it makes a big difference because if you think it's just about exclusion, then you think the firm architect is enough. We don't need to do anything more than just keep other people out of it. But if you think about it as something expansive and um then you would be going right.

Who wants to come into this profession? Once you're in here, what are we actually doing with this title? Are we using it productively or are we just saying we're just excluding other people? So the main idea being that if the act does not define an architect as other than someone who adheres to their requirements, then effect.

We are defining the term collectively. The term architect can be understood as a persona or someone who represents all architects. So what if the Act was not about banning people from using the word, rather it applied to a distinct group of people and allowed us to do something that we wouldn't otherwise be able to do?

There would be a much more functional role to the term architect. The next idea is autonomy, which is that we are capable through our disciplinary knowledge and higher learning and therefore entitled through the law of regulation to make some sort of judgment.

So this is very similar to other professions like medicine, where doctors make independent decisions for patients, they're legally author authorized to do so and they're obliged to make those judgments.

They're not acting on behalf of you as a person saying, I want this type of medicine or I want to be treated in this way. They're acting on behalf of your body, which might sometimes be different to what you would actually want.

And acting on behalf of the health of society. Think about like not prescribing antibiotics or asking you to all get vaccinated.

So they're holding the collective public health and your individual body at the same time and always filtering it through you as the client who's paying who's paying?

So when the architect was debated in Parliament, the key concerns were what requires the architect's signature and what can the architect do that a building designer or an interior designer or an engineer or a building surveyor can't do.

And whilst the architect act limits the title architect to registered individuals, it doesn't define the role, which means it leaves the profession to establish its meaning. It's up to the collective of architects and the profession to give meaning and definition to this word.

So this is an extract of the Architects Act, and this is the code of conduct which is at the back of it. And some examples are a reasonable architectural services must be provided by an architect when they have to act honestly and with reasonable care in the provision of services.

And we can dissect this later on, but just some clues up care. Who are we caring for? And what is reasonable, which means a judgment. It doesn't say you must do this. It's asking it,'s giving you the permission to make some sort of judgment based on all the knowledge, based on all the experience that you have with it.

And so the care of others, that's where we find an example of altruism. So you can see that we ourselves, through this lecture, are doing what we're asking you through this assignment, finding evidence of these professional traits.

We need to have suitable skills and experience. We need to maintain thorough knowledge. And that's an example of disciplinary knowledge. Now disciplinary knowledge, I'll go through that later, that's different because higher learning gets delivered in a structured way in a university.

Disciplinary knowledge combines and encompasses everything outside of that. So all your um yeah discipline knowledge might be part of the practice that you're working in, might be everything, all journals, all books, the whole history, the whole canon of architecture.

And an architect must not sign as checked or approved any drawings which the architect has not checked or approved or supervised, which is this idea of autonomy. If you say you looked at the drawings and you sign it, nobody is checking that.

They're requiring you to say, I did that, I'm signing it. I can stand up in court later on and say that I actually did that. That doesn't always happen. So there's plenty of people who have done work that an architecture is not supervised and they've dropped in all the PDF as um signature.

So I'm not saying that, you know, just in those moments in the future, just go right, I'm not 100% sure that this work has been checked. It wouldn't hurt to ask somebody.

Um so my question would be: should an architect ever advise against a paying client's preferred decision?

What do we think? Should an architect go against a client's preferred decision? Do we think that's the right thing to do? Or not?

Is that noise? Yes? Yes? What do you think? Less than half. Everybody else would just go, alright, we'll go along with it. Have a think about that. We might feel like we don't have much power, but we do.

You know, we it doesn't have to be a simple, yes, we will do that, or no, we won't. How can we talk through that decision? A doctor, a lawyer would use their expertise to describe why that's a good idea or a bad idea, or at least let the client know, choose something else, but be aware that this is what happens.

And this is my advice to you. I'm not here to just give you a documentation set. I'm here to provide you some advice. Give you some context to as why this should or shouldn't happen.

That is your goal. You don't have to say yes to be paid. So it's widely recognized that most buildings are not designed by architects, so this is just something to think about.

And while many architects may view this as an opportunity to expand into other fields or impose more restrictions to prevent encroachment into the term architect, we believe the true objective of our profession is not to ensure every building is designed by an architect.

Instead we should focus on avenues as well such as research, finding new ways to apply our skills and to maximize the broader benefits of architecture. So there's this sort of twofold.

One is to recognise that what we're doing should be done better. And then the other one is well you think about AI, currently we're going to have lots of spare time.

What are we going to do with that time? Are we just going to document more buildings? Or are we going to use that judgment and that time in a productive way to make a bigger impact on things that require architectural thinking behind it?

Alright, disciplinary knowledge. It refers to the specialization and in-depth content knowledge of a certain type of curriculum or subject. So this encompasses the practice notes in acumen.

So you'll see links and references to that in Canvas, which you can look up. And this is managed by the Australian Institute of Architects. It also includes continuing professional development, which is to be completed by all registered architects.

It includes industry magazines such as Architecture Australia nationally and then lots of other magazines around the world. I'm sure you will refer to them in your design studios. Academic journals, which is different in that they are scholarly, they have to go through editorial, they often have a theme, they're linked to a institution, they don't have advertising, they don't have to um be profitable.

So things like the journal of architecture or marine bar as an example, all books, all architecture books. Knowledge on buildings, techniques, methods, designs, and ideas. This wider body of knowledge is constantly evolving, being built upon, archived and disseminated.

Importantly, it has to be disseminated and it has to exist for other people to get access to it. It points to what we should be um researching in universities and in practices.

Importantly this distinct us this this is different to marketing, promotion and celebration, even though it sometimes gets mixed up with each other.

Thinking about where things are funded and where they come from allows you to untangle this. Is this article an ad for a tiling company?

Or is this article contributing to something bigger? You know is everything that you look at and read where is the money coming from and is this about sharing knowledge or is it about promoting something else?

Both things can be true in our profession, but you can at least be aware of it and understand that you fit into this capitalist system, but also that we can counter that with real knowledge and things that are funded through universities, through research.

That shouldn't be about marketing individuals. That's where critique, discussion, and unbiased peer-review systems occur and where things are disseminated and you don't have to pay for it.

So you can see these are just examples of that. So that's the Architecture Australia website. That's the AI Instagram. So when you're looking at these things, just have a think: is this really in the service of all architects or is it promoting individual architects so they can get more work?

Um these are some publications like that I describe, some out of Japan, um, Australia, um Elkrookies out of Spain.

Um these are the practice notes that come from acumen. So practice notes used to be you know a bundle of it used to be like three folders and you would get mailed things to file in them and it give you a comprehensive list of things that you need to know and it's issued by the AIA.

This is now searchable. There is so much stuff on here, it's almost impossible to kind of find anything specific. They now have like you know, AI probably helped, you know, you can do search turns, you can do things like that.

But it's almost um you know, it hasn't been restructured, it hasn't been it's just like it just accumulates. So that is slightly problematic and it's a bit symptomatic of the whole world, right?

Like nobody knows the same things, everybody knows a billion things and they don't know where to find them. But I think it's just worthwhile you guys looking at it, seeing what it looks like at the moment. Um and that that can even be a comment, you know, in your diagrams.

Um and so it's really hard to know where the truth really is, like uh to go back to the actual references, to see the sources for yourself. Then you will know that what somebody's saying to you is actually true or not.

Okay, so the distinction here between higher learning is up until the eighteen sixties most architecture courses were modeled as apprenticeships, as in you didn't study things in a structured way.

It was really about replicating the workplace. And in the nineteenth century the Royal Institute of British Architects, which influenced the Australian Institute of Architects, introduced exams for membership and divided them into three parts.

So part one was knowledge of construction, part two was craftsmanship and contract drawings, and part three was architectural practice. So by about 1882, universities had developed courses covering parts 1 and 2, and Reba exempted university graduates from these parts.

However, part three focused on practice and was never taught at universities and remains under Reba's authority. An agreement was made that universities would not teach how to take your practice a policy that still holds today.

So when we're qualified practices, you should teach students and come into our office and start working on straight away. That's not the goal of the university.

So there is this tension between the profession who wants their grad to be ready to work and the tension in university that says we can't simulate a workplace.

We'll give them everything to critically understand and think about for the profession. They will come to you with that ability. And only through actual projects.

Will they learn how a building goes together, how to administer the contract, how to negotiate with clients. The national standards of competency for architects differentiates between the criteria to be taught at university and those to be learned through practical experience.

And it never says how these should be taught. It's up to the university to work that out. And it's I would say problematic, but it's sort of up to each of the practices to work out are they actually going to deliver these competencies to their grads?

Often not, the graduate has to work it out themselves. This is not the same in every profession. Plenty of we know that for medical students there's structured programs.

For engineers, for accountants, there's programs where you can enter a big practice, they take you around to different paths, and you build up that knowledge incrementally.

It's part of how they hire people, and yet in architecture, the grad, is up it's up to them to work out: am I getting taught everything that I need to get registered? I need to advocate for myself.

And so this competitive, very individualistic way of thinking about your career and yourself is not helpful for the entire profession.

You can't have a whole series of grads who are moving around based on what their individual needs are because most practices are busy doing work and not thinking about how they're going to collectively get everybody up to a certain standard.

So higher education refers to tertiary education that leads to the awarding of an academic degree. And in Australia this is regulated by the Australian Qualifications Framework.

These things should be part of your diagrams as well. And it defines the requirements of a master's degree as follows. Graduates will have a specialized knowledge and skill for research and professional practice for further learning.

And this is why in the master of architecture, where your professional practice subject is being taught, you are not being told what you have to do. You are being told that inquiry, research, and developing knowledge is what this subject is about.

We're not here to tell you how to name, contract drawings, how to sequence them, where to put a signature, that will happen later on in this subject.

But in the past that's all it was about. It was a quiz. Got through the quiz and you didn't know what to do with architecture, that was still okay. You could get everything right in that quiz, go out into the profession, and still be confused about how you're supposed to make decisions.

What's the right or wrong thing to do? Where am I supposed to go now that I'm here and I don't like that I'm just always working on projects that I'm satisfied with that is that that is not contributing to what I thought architecture would be.

There's no way to reconcile that in the past. So we want you guys to have some idea about that now before you enter the profession. And we'll be taught all the other things when you get there.

So we'll some of the other things that the AQR talk about are having advanced integrated understanding of complex knowledge, critique, reflect, synthesise complex problems, concepts and theories, research, transmit knowledge, demonstrate autonomy, judgment, and responsibility.

That is what the AQF asks all subjects at the master's level to be able to deliver.

And some of the other bodies that you can think about are the Associate of Architecture Schools of Australasia. So that is a free architecture school in Australia and New Zealand. Um they have research grants, they have um uh symposiums, they have they advocate, but they're acting on behalf of all architectural universities.

So that's another group of people to look after and see what they do. And then this is our architecture program. It's just showing you that each of these things collectively must fit within the AQF and also fit within the NSCA competencies.

Okay, the final one is altruism. So altruism is implicit in the architects regulations and the strand institute of architects code of conduct.

So you can see here the regulations are here. The AIA has a constitution which you should look up. They also have a code of professional conduct. And they also have one acumen note on pro bono work.

It's just useful to have a think and look at these documents to see and find evidence of what we're describing. Is everything that the AIA doing following the constitution and professional conduct.

What do they say about pro bono work? So altru altruism, um sorry, squit that one already. So Jeremy Till, which I described last week, emphasizes that architects should consider those not present and they should be caring for the nominal person who isn't in the room.

The distinction here though is this responsibility isn't about personal choice. And we saw that in George Beaton's quote earlier.

It's also not about an individual personal character, but a professional obligation rooted in regulations that guide architects autonomous decision making.

So that goes back to the idea of that doctor. We don't go to a doctor because they vote a particular way. We don't go to a doctor because we think that they're a good or bad person. We hope that the service that they're providing is going to be the same regardless of who they are.

Because of everything else that is part of ha what has made them become a doctor. We shouldn't be able to go to an architect and shop around to find the best solution.

We should be hoping that all architects are acting on behalf of a whole series of considerations balancing the clients' needs and the public and each other to make the right choice.

So I wanted to ask people who do we think is the architect's client? Is it the person paying the fee?

Is it um the future occupants. Is it um the neighborhood and the community around it? Is it the architectural project itself?

What do we think? Do we think it's the paying the person paying for the project? Um future occupants? Um, what about the neighborhood and the community around it?

A few more hands, yep. What about the the architectural project itself? Everyone definitely got a few hands, yep.

I think that all of these points can be in your diagrams and they can have a hierarchy and you can say perhaps in the design studio the architectural project itself is often the most important.

When we think about the building code, it's really about the future occupants and the neighborhood. When we're thinking about um town planning laws as the neighborhood and communities.

So all these things can be true at the same time. But really it's untangling it from the person who's paying because that is pretty much the primary focus once you get into the profession.

Perhaps in university there is no client, it's just yourself. Like isn't it an expression of what I would like architecture to be? But then that quickly disappears when you're in repression.

So the core idea in this context is that architects are obligated to make decisions on behalf of others, including future users and those who are unrepresented.

The question is whether existing mechanisms, like the Act as regulations in AIA code of conduct, are ensuring this responsibility is upheld. And if not, we must consider what changes are needed to continue practicing in the service of others.

Okay, so they were five traits with some clues as to where to look for those qualities within the profession.

The next model that I'm going to introduce is the idea of a continuum. And the reason why we do this is because are we still operating like professionals or are we acting more as occupations?

And historically nursing is an example where you know there was care at home to increasingly more structures around care, professional small amounts of professionalisation towards being a nurse, and then when does that tip that over to being a doctor?

Or are they actually diff or are they good these days? So the continuum approach was studied by Wilbert Good and Gerald Moore and assesses the level of professionalization in occupations.

This was explored by identifying when the occupation historically became a profession through the establishment of training schools, universities and professional associations, when it became protected by law and adopted a formal code of ethics.

This is what we have based our lecture, the Architects Act, and the origin of the building code on, which we'll deliver later on in the semester. So it would propose that the core traits of professionalisation are extended through training and abstract body of knowledge and having a service orientation.

So this is different, right? Extended training in abstract knowledge and a service orientation is slightly different to the previous one that we introduced with those five traits and I'll expand on what this means.

He highlights that the profession, like law, medicine and teaching, require trust and autonomy to get inside the head of the client. The key characteristics agreed upon were a knowledge face, a service ideal, and public trust.

So when we apply this to architecture, this approach questions the distinction between architects and related professionals, such as building practitioners, project managers, and examines the value and relationships between them.

Do you trust the building practitioner to act on your behalf or on behalf of others? Do you trust that the project manager is doing the same thing? Or are they doing a job?

A simple distinction is also a skilled tradesperson. They're capable of repeating, they are capable of repeating a technique or procedure proficiently over and over again.

Say a potter at a potter's wheel can make the same pot with incredible skill, proficiency, repeatedly in an identical manner. So where they might have a mess skill, the question is where the judgment would be required, an autonomous decision is made rather than just applying simple competence.

Are they following a set repeatable procedure or are they making a determination, a finding? Are they undergoing a series of investigations to get to the best outcome.

So this is not to diminish trades or to diminish skilled workers, but it's sam simply saying if architects are repeatedly doing the same thing over and over again, are we making a determination on behalf of others or are we just doing things efficiently so that we can get the job done?

Are we actually sometimes closer to an occupation? Are we executing judgment? Are we thinking about others? Are we engendering trust?

And so we're arguing that the professional is required to give judgment and the problem and solution is tailored specifically for the subject and that subject might present with multiple problems.

And when we say the word subject, it might be the building, the site, the client, the need. Which in turn requires prioritising those problems in a sequence which those problems can be addressed.

That aspect of judgment as opposed to skill is one way to differentiate a profession from a tradesperson. And when applied to architecture, this approach raises questions about the difference between us being responsible, liable through insurance, having more knowledge than other related professionals, and this value needs to be communicated more clearly to the client.

If this role is not clear and the relationship to other professionals is not productive, then what does the industry need to be doing differently to maintain and restore this autonomy, this service ideal and this public trust.

If the public think that we're doing work because we want to design good looking buildings, then we're acting just on behalf of ourselves, then that trust is eroded.

They don't come to architects. So I'll keep going with this analogy. So George Beaton, so who was earlier, he defined the profession as well with specialized knowledge and a service ideal as well.

And he'll argue that all great professions, I might go back to this that second quote. Yeah, this one. Um that we need to be able to get inside the head of a client because they are vulnerable and they require us to commit to ethics.

And when we say vulnerable, we're not saying that um in the same way as being vulnerable when you're sick. Vulnerable is in they don't know as much as we do.

So they might have the money, they might have the power, but they certainly don't have the experience, they don't understand as much of the building code, the planning.

They don't understand the history of architecture, they don't understand our cities. They're making decisions based on just what they know and it's up to us, those knowledge holders, to be able to communicate to them.

So we've got one more point Alright, two more quotes here. Alright. So this is good and his I talked over before.

There were limits to which an occupation could professionalize because society did not accept some occupations as having sufficient of the two core elements, a knowledge base and a service ideal.

Four great professions, law, medicine, ministry, and university teaching, share getting inside the client. The attachment and vulnerability of this requires a strong adherence to a set of norm and ethics.

Semi-professionals having not the knowledge, skills, and service value to exchange for public trust. So whether the substance of the task requires trust and therefore autonomy and therefore some cohesion through which the occupation can in fact impose the ethical control on its members.

So what this is really saying is even if the client does not recognize that they don't have as much knowledge as you, we do. That's what we should be sharing and explaining.

And if they're simply asking us to execute some drawings, they've misunderstood what it is that we are responsible for. And if that's what the public think architects do, there's a real image problem at this.

So this is why we bring these ideas back up. We know that they are true of all professions. If we are not communicating this clearly enough to clients in society, it's up to us to do that.

We can't change the minds of others unless we recognize this first. And this is the Australian Council of Profession. And this is that same quote from the one I started off with.

I just wanted to finish this section by saying Something something to think about um in terms of the distinction between occupation and professions is the comparison between nurses and doctors.

So doctors on one hand might have high levels of training and extensive knowledge to make judgment, whereas traditionally nurses performed much more routine tasks. However, technology and artificial intelligence now allows really quick diagnostic analysis that can surpass the judgment of experienced doctors.

Doctors now use data from scanners and computer models rather than referring directly to the patient. Often doctors might not even look at you, they might look at the test results.

And they might decide the best course of treatment through understanding all of this data. And yet nurses now have a much more direct contact with patients and often make their judgments based on immediate conditions, basically looking at the body, tending to a person over and over again, monitoring them over time.

And over time, nursing has evolved into a much higher degree program and is offered at universities. So you can see that these things aren't fixed, it really depends on the qualities that make up the work.

So our definition of the architectural client is problematic because doctors who make decisions on behalf of our health, we trust their judgment, is based on training, history, and codes of compliance.

And as I said before, we're not paying just for the doctor, but we gain access to the entire medical system, including the research that leads to new medicines and new treatment.

It includes all the libraries, it includes all the pharmaceutical companies, it includes all their insurance. It's assumed that we have faith in the entire medical and health system.

Our clients and the doctor's client is not just the patient, but all of these things as a system. A client cannot pay for a better diagnosis, another should an architect, our clients should not be able to pay for a design that the profession disagrees with, and often they do.

And to counter this and link it back to this continuum, like I said before, of architectural work is procedural, with little distinction between architects and drafts people, as both groups follow codes and regulations, this raises the question of what is actually unique to architects?

What are we making judgments on? And semi professionals that lack the expertise to gain public trust. Are we upholding this? Are we still trustworthy in the eyes of the public?

And this subject asks you to consider in what ways is architecture a profession, what is our disciplinary knowledge, in what ways are we regulated, what do we have autonomy over, and what is it that architects do that is unique to architecture?

And therefore, if we are regulated, what are we regulating? If competencies describe what an architect can do, what explains to society the qualities of our profession that allow them to trust us and to have us do that work over other semi-professionals.

So that is that first half of the lecture I introduced two models and gave really specific words as to how you might describe an architect beyond just designing a building, beyond designing for the individual beyond designing just for what it looks like.

So does anybody have questions about that? And then if I could give you a few minutes break and can I all follow the next section. Yes. I don't know which I'm very excited about the old thing all the time.

Yeah. But it's a very simple will be crossed with the model with structure. And the way it will write the thing would be wrong or everything I think all the I mean I don't know how to see one But at the same time, just like our architects now high question lack peopleing train to get to it.

So what I've done back so Sorry. I think the so the question was what was your name again?

You're in my class on what's your name again? Avi. Avine was asking how do you reconcile that a lot of builders have a lot of knowledge and are acting on behalf of others and they have a lot of experience in practical training compared to what we're describing as architects having those qualities as well and also having disciplinary knowledge and also having higher learning.

Um maybe if I go back to the traits. Um These questions are what should be teased out and problematized in your diagram.

So you can work out ways to describe this in your drawing and you don't need to have actual conclusions. The idea is that you start off with an idea of what the word architect means and you can explode that to the point where you're like I actually don't know what's real anymore, I actually don't know.

I've got so many ideas about what it is. And the idea is that over the next couple of weeks and maybe you know over the whole twelve weeks, the whole term, you get to a point where you have a clearer understanding of what you think architects are.

It's okay that you can hold those two things at the same time in your diary. Because until we had this conversation maybe you weren't thinking about the differences between builders and architects.

You just thought builders did this, architects did this, and there's no overlap. There is a lot of overlap. And so when clients on site are looking for knowledge, who are they turning to at what point?

Are they asking for builder? Do you know how to build this? You're going to do make this code compliant? Where is that code compliance coming from? If something goes wrong from a building perspective or look to you.

If it's about what's specified, whether it is fire compliant, whether it is appropriate in terms of the material consistency, in terms of whether the material is um cost effective, is durable, has long-term use, is renewable, is that this is now beyond the installation and the building knowledge of that immediate material and fits into some other bigger system.

And we're not saying that one person's knowledge is more important than the other, but it's implied that if you're a professional, you're holding a lot of other things. The future and the past of that material, how it might get used, where it's come from, how it fits into just materials being used today.

It might not be the architect would never say I know how to build this better than a builder, but it's understanding that what are the obligations that the architects have, where does it stop and start with the builder, where does it actually overlap?

That's a productive way to think about your role as an architect anyway. It's not a fight with the builder. It's like different um domains of knowledge, respecting and understanding that and being able to have a conversation um that's productive for all of it.

The builder's not going to say I'm they want that to be built. They can give you examples of things that they've done before, but they're not necessarily going to test something that they haven't done before for the very first time they might not necessarily be saying well in my opinion across all these different buildings this one is going to be the best for you know long-term durability in 25 years' time based on you know these series of different programs and these types of users.

We wouldn't expect that because that's not what their knowledge domain is. And so I think you can unpack all of those things in your diagram and you can look for like for example building code does regulate what builders do and there is crossover like the national construction code appears in specifications which the builder needs to look at and make sure that they're um they understand when they're building things.

So there are overlaps but there is also it's useful to think about where the knowledge domains overlap and are separate from one another. And we're not saying one thing is better than another, we're saying what can we learn from other professions so that our profession is strengthened.

And if there's things that are not working then can are there clues in other professions. Yeah. Does that yep? It doesn't all have to be resolved and tidy yet.

Alright, at the back. Um you mentioned kind of like looking towards nurses and doctors. Yep. So that is yet another industry that's suffering from this wave of deprofessionalization, as many industries are.

Do you have any comments on that? As that's uh again with dentistry, another example you use where they're suffering this kind of power play between uh dental hygienists and actual like fully qualified and registered dentists.

Again, is that something that we should be worried about in the broader context as training professionals. Absolutely, yes. So I think last maybe in last year, the year before there might have been a four quarters on cosmetic surgeons and the term being used for a cosmetic surgeon versus like a you know a plastic surgeon versus somebody who is like and where the consumer probably doesn't know the difference between the two.

Some are charging uh different amounts of money, some people are offering services that a plastic surgeon might not offer. There's the upsell, there's the you know linking it to other products.

So without knowing where all the boundaries are and things that are shifting, it's very hard otherwise to dissect that. And so what we're asking really is these these issues that you're raising can be part of your diagram.

It's a way it's a lens to view our own profession. If we were very um you know, if we this looked at architecture as always consistent, why can't it be the same as it was in the eighties when there were public architects?

Why can't we just be as valuable as we used to be? Well because the world is changing. We can't be doing the same thing all the time. So if we know that these are some of the traits that we should be upholding, how can we be doing this better?

So just as an example, if you think about any time somebody comes up on the news and they've been investigated by the medical board, that becomes that's important.

It's like they're saying, oh something is wrong with the medical profession, we need to be addressing these particular problems. But then somebody from the AMA will also stand up and say, on behalf of all doctors, this is what we're doing to fix this problem.

The architecture profession stands out less to speak to the public. They address issues less. They don't seem to use that platform as much to say what architects are actually doing, what kind of advice we can provide.

And I would argue that's problematic. If a lot of the content, I mean architecture is also quite easy to co-op for marketing, for image making, for you know, um just publicity, it looks good.

And so that's also a problem. So if you're in the profession and you're finding that you're just doing lots of work with just image making, it doesn't make any sense. You would go, right, why am I spending all this energy on this?

No wonder the profession is, you know, why no wonder the public think that we're just facade decorators, or no wonder they think that we're just doing work for marketing and media and companies.

So I think it's a way to go, our profession doesn't have to be the same forever. We want technology to come and um make things more efficient.

But we also want to be questioning the technology, questioning the amount of knowledge that's out there in the world. Most people can look up all these bodies themselves. They might not know how to interpret them.

And the same might be going for like dental hygienists and dentists. You know, some charge more, some charge less, some will upsell services, some won't. And you can be sure that you would want those dentist boards to be going We're seeing a problem, we're gonna do something about it.

Is this about CPD training? Is it about just making sure everybody in the dentist profession can you make sure you don't do these particular things. Pulling people up and deregistering them.

You know, there are mechanisms like that that happen. And as an example, you know, um with the cross tower, there was a few um public announcements, but they were never deregistered.

So they still operate. Um they still hold held in high regard. And I'm just using that as an example where the people who are in power will continue doing the things that they think are important to their members and to themselves, even to the detriment of the image.

And the image of architecture, you know, is so strong that a lot of people would say it's fine. What do you mean there's a problem architecture function in practice? I mean you know in my mid 60s I'm about to retire.

What do you it'd been great for me? I'm leaving. Why why don't you want to buy my practice? Well because it was good for you in the 80s and we've still got like another 40 years to go and, there's not going to be as many clients, and there's not going to be as many materials, and things cost more, and we want to do better for our employees.

So it's not good for us, and it's not good for middle management or people entering the profession. But the profession can change and so this is why we're kind of giving you ways to unpack it and you can use the examples that you're seeing um in the in current news as um parallels what can we learn from those two things at once.

And recognize that things can change if there is a system to affect. And if you understand that system then you can know strategically where to make that difference. It's not just a whole series of problems that we can't deal with.

So we also show that NSCA competencies to say, well, seven years ago, the idea of thinking of that country and it being part of every design completely unheard of, except a few practices around Australia.

Now it is mainstream in this school. It's not necessarily mainstream in all practices because it's very hard to get projects in that space and get practical experience, but it's moving in the right direction.

Simple change in the NSEA. So if you can have that systems thinking, you can diagnose the problems, you can link it to other professions, you're already heading in the a better direction than practitioners who are working going well you know we'll just do it we'll just deal with it.

Any other questions that people have? Does anyone need a break. Yes? Okay, and you guys come back like in a few minutes so I can make sure I deliver the rest of this lecture in the next section.

I think it's a good idea. Yeah, so why we have to do it. Yeah. Very fair.

No, I think I was on my path. I think there's white eyes. Well, yeah, yeah, yeah. That's the worst. I know there's so much as well like Yeah, don't get some.

Like the same thing. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Well I might have to buy it. Like why are we?

Yeah, she's off. So it's actually one of those. So you get Okay, I might start get started again soon.

There's a couple more people who are coming back. Okay. So with the second half, which I hope we can get done in 35 minutes, I'll start introducing you to some organisational concepts.

So as I said before, one of them was the idea of the apparatus. So this is another approach for examining the profession.

Oh no, Okay, so the apparatus extends that question extends this question by asking in all these different bodies, which instruments have more or less authority.

Where does power and change come from? And this stems from the idea that things are only possible if these networks can be understood as having their own interests.

They function in different ways and they all have different hierarchies. And this concept highlights the relationships of interests of institutions, such as where I described the WACA, the AIAs, the building authority, between the laws, such as the Acts and Regulations, and different bodies such as universities and unions.

They all govern architecture, they all hold power, and they all exercise them differently. So we'll have some examples of this later, but it's up to you guys to understand that power, that authority, and that hierarchy.

So to start with, who do you think has the greatest influence over the final building? The architect? The client, the builder, the regulator or financial institutions.

What do we think? The architect? The client? A few more hands. The builder? Same the man has three four of them. Regulators?

Same. Five hands. Financial institutions? A few more hands? Yep. Um and also does influence sit with one of these actors or is it the relationship between them?

So that might be one that you consider. This framework enables an assessment of whether these approaches and processes serve the public and the profession effectively, and they offer a tool for evaluating and potentially changing the profession in the future.

This network or this apparatus should be applied in your diagram so you can organize and relate all the components to the profession as a system.

This starts to give some hierarchy as opposed to just what people do and what they're responsible for. Importantly, all of the institutions that are described are made up of people and they get elected and they change every few years.

So that organizational power is there, but the people who decide what comes out of it, that renews every five or six years.

And one day you guys might be in these positions of power. And one day you guys might feel like you have enough experience to run into this institution. And that is how it changes.

It's not fixed. It's just simply the way it is right now. And if you get there and you don't have an agenda, then that's problematic. Or if your agenda is just a keep, it's the same.

So keep that in mind as you go through your um career, what is the ultimate purpose that you're trying to serve? Of course to be employed, of course to have work, but beyond that, what else?

What makes that meaningful or what makes it um useful for you and a life well lived in this profession. Um I'll go this one. So this is Thomas Kuhn's structure of scientific revolutions.

And so this is the idea that we should be examining architecture as the need for continual research and potentially over time a paradigm shift. So Thomas Cooney, the structure of scientific revolutions, he's talking about this to apply to science, but it could be applied to anything, including architecture.

So, in a scientific field, a whole series of pages that start with normal science at the top, or business as usual there are discrepancies that occur and they might enter a state of crisis.

So we might describe as some of the issues that we're facing at the moment might be a crisis. So if there's just one or two problems, you know, a couple of buildings that where there's land will be cladding, a couple of buildings where it's cracked, a couple of buildings where something's gone wrong, that's an anomaly.

Once it's systemic and there's a lot, it's a crisis. So what does that mean? It's only when this crisis is reached, and it can be productive, that something drastic can happen and change.

A new worldview is required, is worked on, and is accepted, and a paradigm shift occurs, and then that becomes normal again.

So we're also in an environmental and material crisis and a revolution is happening, and one day, hopefully in the near future, there'll be a different way of practicing. But this idea that there is constantly something to be working on beyond just a couple of problems here or there is the nature of um science, the nature of anything that's evolving a body of knowledge, which architecture should also be doing.

So where do you think architecture is currently? In normal practice? Are we accumulating anomalies? Are we in a crisis? Are we undergoing a revolution or is a new paradigm shift emerging?

What do we think? Do we think we're in normal practice? Anomaly? Yes, a few? Okay. Crisis? Almost half. Are we going through a revolution?

Hopefully. But no one's saying yes to that. I'm me in the center of audience. Emergence of a new paradigm. Well there. Okay. So I think it's interesting to think about that, because we hear the word crisis quite a lot in public you know media.

And we hear lips small amounts, you know, hear revolutions in politics and um but not necessarily in architecture. So there is a balance of you know who's in power at the moment and everybody thinks that life is pretty good in the architecture profession.

And the people who are in power probably don't really need to think about the future because their career is kind of ending and they're the ones who are in power So it's worth thinking about that as you you know move into the professional if you're already in there.

Um the idea is that progress can only happen if this is constant. And without this shift in normal thinking status quo will just remain, you know, in crisis or remain in a state of small anomalies and we may be left behind.

In architecture there's a divide between practitioners who wish to continue normal operations and practitioners who believe we're in this period of crisis and have started operating differently.

Current issues include diminished public authority, increased fee competition, and reduced scope. This reflects a broader trend of shorter production cycles where work processes are collapsing, leading to faster timelines, lower fees, competition-driven individualism, and as a result, the traditional business model we would argue is not working.

While architects now design fewer buildings, this doesn't mean architecture is absent, and many tasks have become standardized through documentation tools, standard codes and regulations. So to advance the profession, architects must find ways for our skills and knowledge to be applied in emerging ways and focus on research and innovation.

And our subsequent lectures and guests are great examples of this. So I might just go to this out of order. Okay. So we'll just give an example of mapping these concepts.

So we start with Plato's divided line. And he uses the analogy of the divided line to move from an understanding of the world through sensations, which we would describe is somewhere here.

Business as usual. This is what we think is happening. And then to try and unpack it so there's a higher way of thinking about it so that we can apply it back to practice.

These forms correspond to increasing levels of reality and truth and understanding, from images and the imagination, to visible things or beliefs, to reason mathematical objects requiring thought, and finally to intelligent knowledge and understanding.

Plato argues that we cannot trust the visible material world because it sub'jesct to change and misinterpretation. Your view of the world is different to my view, which is different to somebody who leads a practice compared to somebody who works for a practice compared to somebody who is leading the meditation, the the head of an organization.

It's all subjective. And he uses the line in the sand as an example. If someone came along and scuffed it and the next person came along and took a photograph of it, you might not actually be seeing that line anymore.

How do we know what is true? We judge material objects based on their ideal forms. True understanding exists above the line where mathematics and abstract representations of objects can lead to deeper knowledge, allowing us to comprehend the object without needing to produce it.

We understand the mathematical equations for a circle without actually haven't just seen a circle. That version of that circle is true no matter where it is and in what form it is.

So as an example, this is Joseph Cossooth's artwork which we've mapped out onto this line. So an image of a photograph, completely subjective, taken by a photographer, black and white, might fade over time.

The physical chair that you could sit on, that you can occupy, that's a version of a chair. Mathematical reasoning, the writing or description of a chair.

Now we have the idea of a chair that's true for everyone, written down in a format that can't be changed. And then collectively, the real format of that chair is actually a version of all three of them.

But if you only ever saw a photograph and you never sat on one and you never read about one and you stayed in this world, that could be anything. It might not be a chair, it might be you know black and white drawing, it could be a window.

There's no way to interpret that. So there's something about going, is architecture just this? Is it just what we see and do every day? Or can we unpack it and understand it in different forms so we can describe it to other people, describe it to ourselves and make changes to it.

So at its most basic, we've put the architect somewhere up here we think in the abstract world and the builder somewhere down here performing things on physical tangible things.

And the client somewhere hovering here. The building is obviously physical, so it's down here. So for a building to be constructed, a contract must be signed.

Where do we think the contract would be? Above the line? Below the line? What do we think? Maybe people think above? Above, below, alright, half half.

We've got the contract at a point where it goes from physical too abstract. It's a mechanism to translate the idea of what this building should be into a something physical.

The same with drawings. We've gone got that closer to that line. That transition between where it's an abstract version, lines and a page, but they represent real things and they're used as a series of instructions to build something.

So for a building to be constructed, a contract must be signed, and the architect provides a description of the design, forming the basis for an agreement between the client and the builder. Without this description, a bank cannot assign value and there's no money for that building.

The builder cannot assign materials or construction value. It remains as a drawing. It remains a series of ideas. Without that drawing package or that contract, without these instruments, it cannot be executed.

You can't prove that it exists, it doesn't exist yet. So there needs to be a representation of it in some format. You can talk to the bank, talk to the builder, make a good educated guess about how much that's going to cost, how long it's going to take to build, what are you going to build it from.

So the building does not take material form until it's administered through this contract. So throughout that whole process, somebody is managing the transition from building materials to its final form, co-compliant, occupiable, that is the architect, through the contract.

Not the architect saying you should do this, this and this, but it's done through that legal instrument of that contract. This demonstrates that the architect's role in creating a market for buildings and in facilitating the creation of materials and labour is a valuable contribution.

Without that contract, without that knowledge, without that process, we wouldn't have the building. Interestingly, architects cannot be party to the building contract. They're obliged to act impartially on behalf of the contract and that architecture that hasn't been built yet.

This raises the question of whether it is a supplying and agreement or a transaction of goods and services. And the answer cannot be solely just an obligation to the client, as this would compromise the architect's impartiality to administering the contract.

You'll hear about this later where the architect has to act on behalf of both the client and the builder and the building that hasn't been finished.

They'll make a decision that doesn't privilege either one of them. This will be explored further in the course. And in this diagram, you can see that the laws that govern the contracts, the building, and the employment are above the line because they're abstract, and the application of a physical contract is below the line.

So physical down here, building goes from design to drawings, and listed through a contract, they pay. There's another contract between the builder and the client.

It goes through production and construction, it gets through practical completion, it goes through a certificate of occupancy, it comes out as an occupiable building. Even that in itself is a step where technically that should probably be up here.

Somebody needs to determine, is it safe to go inside now? That's somebody external and that's governed by laws. So above the line are all the things that we've been talking about.

What goes into that design codes, the AIBV, the Building Act, the Architects Act, and that's regulated by um sorry the knowledge that makes up those uh the knowledge that we have is governed by the double ACA, instigating university and free practice.

It also requires planning, um, it goes through titles, a bank value looks at it, all of those things come together and that's a lot of the things that the client probably doesn't recognise as the knowledge of an architect.

They just want that bit. So next we have the professional traits. So these are all above the line because they're immaterial or the description of things and they're linked to physical forms below the line.

Some of them connected, other times they're translated. So altruism is in our code of conduct. Autonomy and regulation is in the ARB V and in the Act.

We're also governed by, before I said, consumer law and fair work, higher learning is in the university, disciplinary knowledge is in the institute, acumen, magazine, the whole company of architecture.

All of that goes into each design. Collectively, you can describe this as an apparatus. It demonstrates that all of these things come together in order to deliver a design and eventually a building.

We'll consider what instruments and institutions are needed in combination for architects and architecture to exist and we'll examine the role of the architects in this larger context.

So research in the university. We just look at the university, it might be product as a consumer. You might come into the university and want to be able to become an architect afterwards in base your degree on whether you're going to pay for that to occur.

Um and yet we would say that universities tied up in a whole series of other things that are required, not just the paying client or the student. So the function of research in a university is to creatively and systemically expand knowledge.

It involves collecting, organizing and analysing the evidence to deepen understanding of a topic. Research can build on previous work, test and validate instruments, procedures and experiments.

Importantly, it has to be published and peer-reviewed so that it's valid, reliable and credible, which is what a lot of the things that you guys are doing should be translated by your tutors and the lecturers into.

Something that can be shared and disseminated. That's why your exhibitions are public, that's why everybody looks at each other's work. The idea is that it's defensible. You do something and then you explain to others why is this valuable.

What is this contributing to. So when we map it onto this diagram we can see that all architectural knowledge would be represented by as exemplars. And they're exemplars 'cause they get translated into something else.

So it might be an award. So that means somebody's filtered it and said, a jury's looked at it and said this is, you know, a building gets built, it gets um submitted to the AIA awards.

A jury goes and looks at it and they decide this is worth canonizing, distributing to others, it gets an award.

Often these things are studied by you guys as precedent projects. They're used in your design studios, they get further studied and looked at and they're perhaps in journals, they might have books written about them, they use as case studies and they get become part of disciplinary knowledge and higher learning and then go back into what you guys design and eventually might build.

So you can see that these forms of exemplars are not just something that is built. They can only become part of research and disseminate it when they're translated into a different form.

Somebody needs to recognize that that built thing is worth sharing, and you can't share a building with other people from the other parts, you know, on the other side of the world. You can't share that building once it's demolished in the future.

It needs to be translated into something studied, understood, written about, photographed, um, maybe integrated as a precedent into other projects, that knowledge lives on because it goes beyond the building.

And you can see that this system works because One thing to think about later on is what the difference is between um exemplars that are actually demonstrating innovation and helping the profession and society versus ones that are self um you know a self reflection of what architects think are important right now.

Just because other architects think it's good doesn't necessarily mean the public think it's good. How can we have more exemplars where it is actually demonstrating public good and value beyond just winning awards, beyond just celebrating lots of money being spent per square per square meter rate on a building.

Because that says to the public that you can only get good architecture if you spend lots of money on it. What are we saying to the public and to each other? And we know that's not possible.

So when we talk about exemplars, it's not just the awards though. Exemplars can be in all other in lots of other formats. So I think it's worth thinking about this.

They're award systems that are outside of architecture, um ones that are given by city councils, by education specialists, um in the commercial sector, they are probably closer to what clients want, what the public want than what architects think.

So it's worth thinking that just because we're holding them in high esteem doesn't necessarily mean that the only way to celebrate what architects are doing.

Importantly I want to link this to IP as well. The idea is that once architecture is written about and um you know the moment you submit your project into the awards as an example, they own those photographs.

They can now use that as marketing for themselves but also it goes into books and magazines. So there's something about if we did not just say that um individual buildings and their IP belong to the individual architect.

Everything, including all writing, all photographs, all videos on architecture, is that actually shared collectively by all architects?

Is that not what we are subscribing to when we enter this profession? This has now become knowledge and that act of it being translated into the um journal, the article, the book practiced by um sorry, used as exemplar in the university, used as precedent in a project, constitutes this knowledge as collective.

Obviously there are individual bits of copyright along the way. But seeing in a larger way, we can understand that if we are contributing to the profession, then it should be something that can be accessible to everyone.

Okay. The idea of innovation and progress. So innovation can be seen as the practical implementation of ideas that result in the introduction of new and improved goods or services.

It can also be seen as a new or changed entity realizing and distributing value. Generally, it leads to the spread of ideas or technology, and this diagram demonstrates that that feedback loop can be made between built buildings, exemplars, and research, and is required for innovation and progress to exist.

So, in order for something to be built for us to recognise that it actually did something different, we need to write about the fact that it did something different. Is it using less materials? Is it now of a higher energy rating?

Is it considering culture in a different way? Is it celebrating the context in a different way? That needs to be written about, it's not implicit in that built building.

So there's something about you physically make it, it's constructed, but then it needs to be reflected, theorized, written about, disseminated for it to be useful for other people.

If the drawings for a building were not published, if somebody didn't describe the innovation in a building, nobody else could learn from it. You can't see those things when you go and visit a building.

So we would describe this loop as something that's intrinsic to a profession that wants to further its knowledge.

And if we consider the prior professional traits of service ideal and altruism, then innovation should be part of what we pass on. And we need to think about who benefits from it.

Is it the individual person, the company or shareholder that is receiving that innovation? So that's really easy to think about when thinking about like AI and you know, apps and building applications.

But does it actually benefit the person who's not in the room? And if professional knowledge is not shared, advanced or tested and used widely, and it doesn't contribute to the disciplinary knowledge or to higher learning, then why would we be spending time on it and how is it benefiting everyone?

This separates the collective from the individual and the innovator from the entrepreneur and it's a key concern for a profession that truly wants to advance and progress. If we were all entrepreneurs, then we would not be thinking about how our buildings affect society, we'll probably be doing something else.

We could be app designers, we could be working in Silicon Valley. Um all right. This one is about copyright and intellectual property.

So I talked about that before. Intellectual property is the legal rights that protect the creation of a work and includes patents, trademarks, trade secrets, and copyright.

So copyright is a form of intellectual property that protects original works of authorship, such as architectural work. And we'll go through this again later, is part of the standard Klein architect contract.

And it says that the architect is the author or the artist that owns the copyright of that design, and that we give a license to the client to use that design on that particular site.

And the reason why we distinguish this is because a patent is a legally enforceable right for a device, a substance, method, or process. So that might be code, that might be um a method of doing something in software and that patent um is only it it exists because it protects that um instruction or that substance but it's often given to s people pay to use it.

So AutoCAD, um uh obviously Rabbit, each time you use it, you would be paying for it. So intellectual property is above the line, it's governed by the law and it's abstract.

And for creation to be protected by IP, it needs to go through something. So it goes through a patent, it goes through a contract, and then the built version is just that one-time license for its physical construction.

It can't be built on another site, it's that one-time use. And the reason why we talk about this is because yes, we know that's true, but individual ownership can be problematic.

Um if awards are limited to those that are already recognized and workers and designs are exclusive, if we never distribute them, if it's always driven by competition, individual ownership and hierarchical structures, it means that there's no benefit to the collective.

We're all acting on behalf of ourselves, we have problems, we have innovations, but we're not sharing them. And collectively, that's not great, even though it's good for the individual.

And when that individual disappears or that project disappears, none of that is passed on to anybody else. Okay. Market mechanisms. The connection between intellectual property and its mercantile value lies in its ability to be sold in the market, for example, a building once constructed by a builder and paid for by a client inherits value through a contract that the client that grants the client a license to use the design.

So we are part of this system in that we might think we're just designing buildings, but we're always improving value for our client and we're always in we're always through the act of the architect being involved.

That piece of land increases in value, the apartments or the commercial premises that didn't exist before now has some new capital value. We are part of this system, though we don't necessarily think we are.

Um a construction method, material and system is can acquire value if it's patented or licensed. So for people who are not for people who are not um involved in building, but then creating software that also has value.

So this diagram illustrates that any creation by an architect can become an exemplar through design, innovation, or system. It exists above the line, where it's governed by laws, and is recognized as intellectual property.

And architects that promote a service or a product with a direct market value sometimes contradicts the purpose of the profession. So both these things can be true.

We know that we are part of the market system, we know that we're involved in making things that might become patents that are licensed for use by clients, but it raises important questions about the way we practice.

Should architects focus primarily on the commercial value of their work or should they also be upholding a broader professional responsibility that serves the public interest? Can we not do both?

The question challenges the core approach to architectural practice, its ethical considerations, and how it should be structured in relation to market forces.

So I've come back to this again. The models presented today are not definitions to memorize. They provide a language for understanding the profession as a system rather than as a collection of individual architects or discrete competencies or discrete problems.

So the traits model talked about the capacities that give us authority and public trust. The apparatus revealed the relationships between institutions, laws, contracts, knowledge and power, and Kuhn suggested that this established model needs to develop to respond to contemporary conditions and so that the profession can evolve.

And then the divider line helped us trace our abstract obligations and ideas through architectural instruments. So those instruments are always in the middle, they convert abstract thinking into physical form.

And so these are some of the examples of where cracked slabs, frontfill towers, both these two apartment buildings went on fire around the same time, and the building confidence report by Shergold and Weir that came out a few years later.

This aims to give specific requirements that the profession needs to adopt in order to minimize these things from happening. And we will hear from Glennis Fox, who's the registrar for all the architects registration building Victoria next week, and she will be talking about how this has been implemented.

And it's a culture change. It's the idea that compliance culture is not just something that you have to do because you won't get you know, because we'll make your job easier. It's about building in this implicit ethical requirement as part of everyday decision making.

And the fact that this had to come out and these compliance culture CPDs had to come out really showed that like eight or nine years ago, most people were not thinking about this.

Um so it's good to be in a point where um this idea of compliance culture is here again, or not what but it that it's something that's being um disseminated and educated through the profession and it will be good to hear from some of the feedback she's gotten from practitioners which anecdotally is oh now we need to do more stuff.

Now it's gonna take more time. So that tension is interesting to unpack with her. Um and this is what I described last week.

Even though so this is Judge Woodward's findings about the lacrosse tower. And here it says the external cladding failed to comply with the BCA.

L. U. Simon the builder, installed the clanning, and Ellenberg Fraser breached their obligations when they were novated and they failed to exercise due care and skill.

Ellenberg Fraser failed to remedy the defects in the design. They failed as the head consultant to ensure that these panels and these samples were compliant.

And so even though this idea that we were nov that the architects were innovative, they didn't need to consider the construction code because they were just looking at the image or the colour of the panel, the judge thinks otherwise.

And one last thing I was going to show is you can see that um a whole series of um uh Shenzhen um earthquakes killed a lot of children.

And this Iowa installation a whole series of backpacks that represent all the children who passed away. And you can see that very small decisions that are based on codes, building construction industry, professional obligations can have huge impacts and that whole system needs to change in order for something like this to not happen.

It's not one individual person's responsibility is that individual plus that whole system that has caused this to happen. And if we can't recognise the both of them are important and entangled, then we won't be able to stop things like this from happening in the future.

Okay. Thank you, everyone.