And you wish to start earlier, can you please allocate yourself to tutorial five? So if you guys check my timetable, are you guys still able to move?

And I have to have a look. It's because it should still be self-allocated and when there's something open then you can move. So you guys might not have been aware that tutorial file is available, but if you'd like to start a bit earlier, that one is currently empty.

There's also students who are unallocated. So those students should go into tutorial live. Otherwise we won't have a tutorial.

Does anybody have any questions about where they what tutorial they're in. Or does everybody know where they are? Yep.

Okay. So what I'm going to suggest is have a think about it, go to your true forum today. You'll choose, we'll ask you, you know, are there a few people who want to move to an earlier one?

Um, you know, if you're in the 1:30 to 3 o'clock. Um, or if you'd like to be in a 240 where there's less people, move to 2405 as well, because that's the different things.

Okay, so the lectures are week 1 to 12 in this room for two hours each week. And the tutorials go from um week one to week five if it happened semester break.

Um so now is the time to introduce your tutors. So I'll be tutoring one of two of these tutorials.

We've also got Timber We're right here at the front. We've got Stephen Shu who's here at the front as well. He took his in um major project and um Master of Design Studios and we've got the scene and front as well.

She also does um major classes of actually quite sure um so you guys may have encountered her before. We also have that sterling I think even here but we will be here for which we found out later.

Um So across all of the people who are teaching, everybody has a wide variety of different kinds of practice experience.

And I'll talk through the way that the subject is taught when I go through the lectures. But just so that you guys know how Canvas is set up, the home page, which you can see on the screen, you'll see the course overview um and you'll see that there's the lectures and the tutorials.

Each of the weeks are organised here so if you click through this is this week's um page and you'll see the lectures that are there, you'll see pre-readings and a Padlet.

So the idea is that you're doing the reading before you come to the lecture, rather than doing like reference reading afterwards. We're conscious that you can hold a lot of information, you can do still lots of things across lots of subjects.

If you do the reading beforehand, you've got some idea of what this lecture might be about before you arrive. Put some thoughts down and then have a think about whether that's still something that's interesting to you.

You think you're getting as quotes for your assignments. It's really a way just to get you in the habit of reading, coming to the lecture every single week. I'll use and this is arranged by a tutorial so you can find yourself in a tutorial.

Put something down and I will either have a look at them just check comprehension and understanding and then the choosers would do the same in the tutorials. To find out if there's anything that there's big questions that are unclear and concepts that need to be further clarified.

So people have just arrived at the boss room down the front. Um you can get you'll be to move down a bit if you don't want to set the front row.

I think there's some room in the middle band there's a little bit. Yep. Okay. So elections are people through a lot of content that we didn't hear.

You can do research into professional practice, but it won't be through the lens of what we're describing as a subject. So in order for you to understand the concepts that we're speaking about specifically, come to the lectures, the Q<unk>A with the people that we invite is not always very legible in the recording, so come here, ask the questions directly.

This is your option to give you the question. So that is what you're um to the mission for um so how would you get into the fact that that is something people who are in the profession who are on regulatory boards have different experiences that you can hear.

Okay, so announcements, I'm sure this is the same for all subjects that you do. So we'll communicate with you here. Your tutors might communicate with you here as well. Um then we'll talk about specific classes, if they're sick.

The syllabus gives you an outline of what happens through the semester and you can see when the assignments are due. So there's four assignments through the semester.

Plus one is the one we'll be starting today. Um with 25%, that's individual. The next one is a practice manifesto that starts in about week five.

Individual and then you've got a group of three tasks which will start in about week eight and that will be due in week 15. And then there'll be an online quiz sometime in week nine, which is worth five percent.

So across all of these assignments, you get progressive feedback after you submit these two. And the idea is that you're building up knowledge. You' wouldtn need to be understandinging and look clearly to reach that fifty percent um assessment task three, but it is building up concepts in the first few assignments and then in that final one is when you're required into a contract.

All right. So is it reasonably clear how Canvas works, where people are going with action, what you need to look at for through the semester?

Yes, okay. So I'm going um just to start then. Right, so today I'm going to start with a few words to introduce the subject and then Peter Archives Design Studio, which you guys might also know from Bachelor's Masters if you've had this design studio as well as before.

And he will go through another lecture to the architect architecture and information. So as an introduction to our lecture series, this is a manifesto for the progression of architecture through the lens of this subject.

So recently there's been a proposal for the architects registration for Victoria to be absorbed into a broader business and professions regulator.

So in this subject we take real issues that are happening in the human profession and unpack them through this subject. Unlike history which is looking backwards and design studio which is projecting what we like more professional.

Professional practice has live issues that are happening all the time that all architects are affected by. And so when we are hearing about this, what it raises is what is this profession-specific regulation intended to protect and what must architecture demonstrate to justify it.

So the Actors Registration Board of Victoria at the moment regulates the Actors Act and the registration of all architects. It is its own government entity, but it is independent.

And so the proposal is that it should not exist anymore in that separate format, but be in a broader business professions regulator, along with any of science and some other professions.

And so understandably the profession is concerned that doesn't have its own board anymore. But what we're saying in the subject is is this this opportunity to understand what that actually means?

Why are we being asked to be put into a bigger professional um uh organization and if we can't articulate our value, is that something that we should be spending some time doing?

Rather than just doing the work of architecture of architects. So this manifesto does not simply argue that the AERBB should remain because architects deserve their own board, which is what the professional is generally aimed at.

It asks the more important question. What distinctive public capacity is the regulatory system supposed to create and maintain? So architecture is not merely a product.

The architect is not a brand and the profession is not a collection of market categories. This might be how the public would be architects.

And depending on whether you're working or practice, how long you've been exposed to architecture for, how much you follow it from Instagram, in Magazine, in books, um, you may have some of these conceptions as well, which is what we're addressing in this subject.

Architecture is a collective discipline and trust to make judgments about the built environment on the harm of people, including those who cannot always be present when decisions are made.

And so the manifesto is our position, but it's also an invitation for you to test, challenge, and rewrite it and rethink it through the semester.

We argue that education registration and regulation are not valuable simply because they distinguish ourselves from others. They exist to cultivate a particular capacity, to synthesize complex knowledge, exercise professional judgment, and act in the broader public interest.

And if the profession cannot demonstrate this capacity, its regulation has little public purpose. We are very like Motz professions inward facing profession.

We're concerned about what other architects are doing, whether we're doing something with the other architects about us. Whether we're in the other employees are doing work that we like, whether we're getting clients that we like, whether we're getting the opportunities to express the ideas that we think we would like to put out into the world.

And yet when you come into this subject, all of a sudden it's not about the individual architect pursuing their own life career. This hints at something bigger than the individual architect because without the rest of it, individual architects don't exist.

And so this is the petition has been put forward to the Parliament of Victoria in opposition to abolishing the Architects Registration Board or Victoria.

We're not dismissing the work that is being done here, but we're saying there are other questions that this poses, which is not necessarily we are more educated, we go through registration and we have pathways and we need to demonstrate competency.

Therefore we should be different. It is. What are we doing that is different from doing designers and ask people? How are we distincting? Can we demonstrate that and communicate that to the public and to the government and to ourselves?

So therefore we propose that we should be defining ourselves by what we're entrusted to do, not merely because we have the title architect.

Registration should articulate the particular forms of judgment society entrusts to architects. The Act currently establishes the collective and its standards are left that leaves the fundamental meaning of the architect largely to the profession itself.

It doesn't say that the architect needs to be excited, it says divide the. And we believe this is the work of universities, researchers, and institutional bodies.

So we examine that in one of the lectures that I'll do them next week, which is models for understanding. So it's worth thinking not of yourself as being an architecture student on your way to becoming an architect.

But what did you think society was asking architects to do before you came into this degree? What are the assumptions that you already had about what architects role in society was.

And I'm sure you thought about this before you decided to apply this degree and then go back to some masters. It's taking your thinking outside of yourself and going, what do you want to society think architects are supposed to be?

And so this is just a portrait of Christopher Wren with some of the instruments that he would have used in order to demonstrate that he had been considering more parties and more people and more conditions in order to for it.

The next one is to number two, to place professional judgment, not competency, at the centre of professional capacity. So all courses in university degrees, in order to them for them to be accredited towards registration have a series of competencies that describe tasks that you must be able to achieve within the university and you achieve them again once you graduate, you put them in your role book, and then you do an exam and you do an interview to demonstrate that all those competencies have been met in order for you to become a registered architect.

We argue that these competencies just describe tasks in like do it or administer a contract. And yet, professional judgment describes the ability to recognize a problem, synthesizes conflicting knowledge, prioritise competing interests, and make a determination in circumstances where no procedure can provide the correct answer.

A doctor is given all the medical knowledge they require and yet they still need to make a judgment about a patient's condition that goes beyond what they've been tested for.

When does following the process stop being enough? I might just elaborate on that. For example, a client might say something like, we would like to replace a design with a cheaper, more compliant uh but still compliant product.

A class person might revise the drawing. A building designer might assess the design and the national construction. The fire engineer might assess the technical performance to see if it's if it works.

And the building surveyor will determine if it's a compliant material, so it's not combustible. And what is the architect asking? How does this substitution affect biostrategy, weathering, the interface, long-term maintenance, the appearance of the grouping, the contractual intent, the future occupant, the client's long-term liability, and the coherence of the project as one whole.

The architect must make a judgment between these competing claims and no individual specialist owns that entire question except the architect. So architects are not regulated because they possess knowledge unavailable to others, but because society expects them to exercise independent judgment across forms of knowledge that are otherwise fragmented between multiple specialists, clients, contractors and regulators.

Point number three. We need to recognise the client who is not in the room. An architect's obligation cannot end with the person who is paying the fee, because future occupants, neighbours, communities and future generations are subjects of the architects' decisions.

Who is affected by the decisions that are absent from the table and from the meeting? For example, in your career, you may work on schools, apartments, hospitals, public buildings, which are designed for many people who are unknown to you.

The child who will attend school in 2035, is not at the client meeting. The future apartment owner does not approve the facade substitution, and the person evacuating during the fire does not review the fire strategy.

Architects are making decisions for people who cannot participate in the decision. Though we may be balancing code requirements, geometry, occupancy for the means of escape, the wrong judgment may affect the future of you think.

And an architect may recognise that even though a client has a preference for something, it may be unlawful. It may be commercially advantageous to them, but it might create unacceptable consequences for the public.

So professional judgment sometimes requires acting against the immediate preferences of the person who came to be And so when we say client, they may be giving you a project and they may be seemingly with all the power to decide whether you work on that project or what.

But we are saying to expand that definition of the client and that you can hold multiple versions of that client in your head when making decisions. And you can balance out those things when you're deciding what needs to be done.

An either way in this in this um installation is responding to um birth plates that connected school children in China and used the school bags that are Han on the side representing the children who passed away who were not there and implicated by the lack of building oversight, regulation and checking of the construction of the structure.

And so this represents the voices of people who have been affected by the building, who occupied it, but were not there when it was designed and not there when it was built.

Manifesto point number four. We should treat loads, contracts and regulation as instruments of architecture. So in this subject you'll be exposed to things that you don't often look at in design studio history or text.

And though you may look at the National Construction Code for tech, perhaps contracts might be there as well and regulation might be there. We're asking you that it's not necessarily at that enacting them.

It's about understanding why they exist and what they allow the architecture. Architecture not understand more of something imposed upon design. So people who are really working practices, sometimes the rhetoric is oh, now we have to do this extra thing.

Or now we can't do this design because we have to confine to this. It's almost viewed as something restrictive. Yet frozen contracts are descriptions of the world we collectively intend to produce.

Every current contract and regulation has been decided by in what kind of people. They're reviewed, they are seen to be still relevant, and people participate in changing and writing, performing and testing them.

Which is via the ARBB is now being looked at. Every so often the national construction code gets looked at. The national the competencies also get looked at every four to five years.

These things are not fixed. So the codes that we're working with have evolved as the profession has evolved.

And then we'll change again in the future. So for example, Parliament might determine that people with disabilities should not be discriminated against and hence the Disability Discrimination Act and technical standards have established these requirements.

Someone must determine what inclusion means at this schoolway or on this slope and in this building and for particular users. At its most basic, it might be an accessible toilet.

But taken more broadly, it means how any person who is not able bodied moves through a building, through dark lighting, through thresholds, through doorways. So the National Construction Code does not design a building.

The architects interpret this abstract collective requirement within particular circumstances. And work together with the client and the building surveyor to see what's appropriate.

Similarly there is no entirely objective point at which a building is complete. So someone might judge whether it's reasonably capable of occupation, which is when it's an occupation occupancy permanent, and whether its remaining defects over all emissions prevent practical completion.

And that determination has contractual, financial, and safety consequences, which we'll go through further when we get to the contracts part of the semester. Keeping these things in mind is important because the client and other people who have best interests in the financial viability of projects will always pressure for you to finish faster, quickly get it done.

And yet your professional obligation is to go, is this finished and if it's not finished why? And how can I describe that the effect of it being even practical completion early is going to have these detrimental effects?

The same exercise of judgment occurs when architects certify payments or interpret gaps, ambiguities, and contradictions within project documents. And so architects should therefore participate not only in applying proposed contracts and regulations, but in testing and questioning and reforming them.5.

We should make professional knowledge collective. So knowledge produced through architectural practice should be systematically identified, tested, published, taught, and incorporated into standards and regulation.

Innovation that remains proprietary to an individual practice advances with an individual companies. And innovation that enters disciplinary knowledge advances architecture. And so this is a difficult thing to hold for lots of people in practice, and perhaps for you guys as well, that for business viability for employment, there is the idea that it would be not an architect is an individual practice.

And yet, we also know that we are all acting on behalf of the public and we're all acting together because there are lots of examples which I'll show later where individual acts make the entire profession fall into disrepute and hence people going to building designers, project managers, drafts people.

So for the viability of the entire profession, it is in our best interest not only to do good for each other and for the public, but to decide what is it that we are aiming for.

We are not just people who can use BIM, most all draft people can use that increasingly a large sum of the things that we do. And so therefore what is it that our profession is able to do beyond just compliance?

And if we can't decide that, share that, then our profession would be increasingly obsolete. So when we talk about architectural knowledge, that is everything, an inclusive university, the fact that all these students are in practice and also sharing their knowledge with you guys, that they are participating in these lectures and considering these ideas and going out into the world and talking to their clients, also participating in literature.

That is that collective knowledge. If we were all individuals, we would all just be working on our own practices and never interacting with anybody else except our clients. And yet we know that's not for our architect's function.

And so this is an example of the Royal Academy of Science where the French King and Minister inspects the side meeting, and they are surrounded by all the things that make up the profession, scientific profession at the time.

And it's state-funded. So there's this idea that if science is brought to the fore, collectively society will do better. That all these observations and all this testing and boarding of knowledge will advance society.

And we know the impact that architects can have on a city because I'm sure we've been to places that have good architecture or good thinking about tracial planning and places that don't do well.

And there are pockets in and around just the CBD and around and can use others that then you strike the difference. Um just move on that for a little bit longer, which is an example is a failure discovered on one project should become knowledge capable of preventing the same failure every and lacrosse towel is an example of that.

Grimberg Tower is another one which is how we cover. So that's one isolated case that can be applied to a community building, which is why lots of probable cutting is there for um for kids is continuing to be replaced based on how much there is, and there's two the occupants inside the building.

Innovation that remains proprietary to one practice advances that individual company. And the profession cannot depend solely on a private expertise of individual practitioners, because it needs institutions capable of transforming practical experience into collective knowledge.

The profession would be very slowly if it was just up to individuals doing very small things one at a time. Okay, manifesto point number six.

We should judge innovation by the public benefits it produces and redistributes. So innovation should not be measured simply by novelty, efficiency, or commercial returns.

Because the profession should be asking who benefits from this innovation. A reduction in production costs retained as company profit is commercial innovation.

So when AI takes your jobs, who is going to be benefiting? Will it be your employer? Will you get more time to do the things that you need to do? Will you get paid more unlikely unless you're doing this normal.

Well the client just demands for things to be cheaper and faster. So there's immediate implications just on the work that you do today.

Is that benefit passing on to the employees or the public? Are they getting better design and better judgment? Or why they' justre getting things faster with less time to consider up the implications.

A method that becomes available through profession and improves outcomes for the property is professional progress. That is what we could demonstrate and say to the public. We have been working on this before ways and collectively this has done this.

Who benefits from innovation? And I think this is important because most of the recording tries to do it is the new things that haven't seen seen before.

And so is that pursuit for the individual because it's novel or is that novelty actually going to translate into something else or something else?

An example we give here is Diego Rivera's um mural on what was happening in Detroit and industrialisation.

Technology was not just celebrated because it made cars faster, but improved collective society. People were gaining skills, people working more efficiently, but also people were getting better working conditions, being um paid better, and they were loading things that were transferable.

And so the idea of labour and the public and innovation in this instance is um uh interwoven with one another. It can't be enabled.

We should be moving architectural discourse from what architecture is to what it does. So we should stop defining architecture primarily through typology, aesthetics, and building categories.

We should be defining it through performance, effects, and the problem it is capable of addressing. So rather than thinking about architects like this is a school, this is a public building, rather it should be, who can now access something they couldn't beforehand?

What is the difference between a good and a bad school? Is it because the square meter rate is higher on one versus the other? Is it because you know there's more voids in one than the other? Is it because one has um you know more innovative types of classrooms than another.

We really should be judging that on what it does to the user and whether there is things that we think are important that are part of the design actually follow through to the experience of the people who are in the side.

What behaviours does it enable? What risks does it create or reduce? What does it contribute beyond the boundaries of that.

An example here is that a good city is governed in a way where trade, education, dancing, construction, farming, and everyday life occurs.

The architecture is simply a medium through which those things can occur. Like people not encountering architecture by describing how beautiful it is is how they're using it and how it's changing their same life.

Manifesto point number eight. We can stop competing through the withdrawal of professional responsibility. Reduced scope and reduced fees cannot become mechanism for progressively believing judgment and oversight that justify the profession's regulated status.

So for example, the law cross tower demonstrates the contradiction. Commercial arrangements may limit services, but the professional responsibility and expectations of judgments do not disappear proportionally.

So we may say we don't do that work because the client does not want to pay us to do it. If we say yes, we still have the responsibilities of what an architect was being paid for from being.

So can we push back? Or can we describe our value so that that is not a responsibility given to somebody else.

So a facade consultant may enter an easy project, the fire engineer may issue a report, the product supplier might propose a substitution, the architect may be the only participant who retain knowledge of the design system, the intention of its document and the relationship between sustening decisions.

We are the only people who are there from the beginning to the end and tracking any of the changes and considering the implications it has.

Thousands of substitutions, requests for information and variations, and progressively undermined the entire whole. And someone must retain an understanding of the building as an interconnected system.

A limited commission may reduce the architect's contractual services, but public expectations of professional judgment do not diminish in proportion. If artists progressively surrender coordination, contract admin, site observation, responsibility for the whole, the argument for progression-specific regulation becomes really hard to present.

This is an example of forensic architecture.org for people in London. They have gone back to Grandfather Tower and used the silverbone architect to freely visualize the spread of the fire over time and then expanded their professional responsibility through public interest investigation.

Baby do the schools and concepts as well. And then that's the effect that a citywide spatial thing might affect an individual person of own children.

What responsibility is the architect given away over time and what do we need to make sure that we hold on to or at least articulate our value and get feedful?

Manifesto point number nine. We need to rebuild the profession as a functioning apparatus. As connected between universities, registration boards, institutes, practices, media, and government.

They should not be operating as parallel organizations, maintaining their own programs. Their purpose is to identify anomalies, contradictions and failures, commission research, solutions, and translate knowledge into education and population.

Is this existing apparatus actually producing oversight, strategic thinking, and consensus or just keeping the profession afloat? So the AIBB will come in and since LaCrosse Tower has happened, there's been a billing confidence report and they've taken active steps to educating the whole profession.

So it should be a good conversation to be having with them because that's five years ago it didn't exist. Down the two famously said that labor issues was not my duty as an architect to look at.

So when she was working on a standing building, not necessarily the one that had people um um die and not necessarily the ones that um were vertically affected, she did still famously say that labour and work conditions are not part of her responsibility.

And yet we know that without staff tech, without somebody who is being paid a lot of money to make architecture that is iconic in a country that she's not living in, she has power to say no.

And a lot of artists that um were working at the time refuse to exhibit um in Qatar around that same time.

So they felt like they had the agency to say known and yet architects behold into financial and government and organizational instruments felt like they did not. And this is an interest um burning.

We are not saying that problems don't arise, but when they do arise, what is the profession doing so it doesn't happen again. And if this system isn't functional, where is it breaking down?

And can we be tangible strategies to try and use them? Number 10. We should be measuring the profession by its contribution to the public, not merely the success of the individual members.

The advancement of architecture is not different from the advancement of architecture. Awards, media, advocacy and institutes should prioritize contributions that expand the disciplinary counseling and public benefit rather than primarily celebrating individual practices, which is what you see all in the media.

So if that is what people are believed to think of this architecture, it is little wonder that the public thinks that architects are not delivering on things for the city.

And then little wonder that not all architects feel like they're fulfilled in their career because they're not winning awards. And then the architecture practices that win awards continue to get awards because they continue to get work from clients.

And they perpetuate the same kinds of architecture. So this is just an example of an artist at his standards who transformed landfill in Manhattan into a wheat build.

So instead of very, very expensive land in Manhattan, just Fish is to feed America. Everybody is eating bread, not everybody is owning bits of land in that happen.

A successful architecture profession is not simply one in which architects prosper, it is one in which the built environment and the people affected by it are better serve and then we could demonstrate that these are the things that we are professing to do.

So many of the activities we have to are not exclusive to artists. The distinction here is that act possible things that belong to elliptic formation, statutory obligation, and the breaking judgment.

So a building designer might design a building them, but we are exercising judgment and care. So the purpose of regulating architect is not to protect the type of architect, it should be to create and maintain this collective who's capable of exercising judgment.

So your task this semester is not just to learn how the profession currently operates, it's to determine what the profession should become through your own lens, through your own values, and also how that might translate into the ego.

So there's that lecture. Alright, and now I'm going to do a very quick one on professionalism and architecture education.

So this is around why I think we practice my contacts and toes, but why we also do something different I begin with the definition from German tool in architecture 10, where he suggests that the power associated with object making and self-interest are architects.

Has led to a sort of blindness to the state of others. And if we were to shift our focus from just object making as a form of problem solving to the idea of architecture, we would recognize the artists are not acting for themselves, but on behalf of others, and this means to act ethically.

As opposed to the traditional professions of divinity, teaching, medicine, and law, the other, or the subject of our care is not always immediately clear in architecture because we often filter it through a building.

And where the doctor cares for both the body and the health of society, and the lawyer administers the law and the clergyman acts on behalf of the spirit and the beliefs of the society, the architect's duty of care extends beyond the paying client to the person who flees the building down the fire case stair and the public who must inhabit our cities and buildings.

The survey of current ways that ethical viewpoints are passed from lecturers to students show there is often an over reliance on top-down subjective beliefs and belief experiences.

I'm an artist, this is what I experience, therefore, this is how you should think. And that's how design students often form.

The lecture experience is a very small sample of what they have experienced and it encourages you to mirror what they have lived and yet your paths through your professional career will be very at different and you need to anybody else.

You might think about how ethics is described in design studio, and yet it's always specific to that particular brief and the specific conceptual agendas of that design studio.

And then when you get visiting people come in and talk about what they would do and give you feedback, again it's a very small sample of these subjective beliefs. And so where do ethics fit into professional practice tendency?

And how does that get tested and applied? So the idea is that through the subject, we introduce you to a few university principles.

There are very specific definitions, intestine, and you work at three years on the basis of that one or it's not just ethics that it might be protecting traits, any definition, any conceptual definition.

So the process for life and share in Australia is a three-part record. Sorry, I might just go to that. Okay. So if you register in Australia and more specifically in New Torah, there's a three-part process.

So part one, I think it might be in here somewhere, is a law book where the candidate himself records time against key criteria from the Accreditation Council of Australia.

Part two, you do a national examination paper in part three, you do an interview where skilled practitioners ask you general questions.

And so in the past, this subject was taught as an invitation. It would be very similar when you would verb a competency, you would do a multiple choice question, multiple choice quiz, and then you would practice doing a contract.

And what this meant was architecture was just a series of discrete tasks. This idea of ethics, the collective, the client, setting regulation as something was invisible.

And we know that the reality of current practice is much more complex than yours. We cannot replicate an actual project or an actual office.

There's too many contingent things. We're not working on a live project. You're going to be sitting in on meetings, you won't have changes suddenly occur and you won't need to accommodate multiple viewpoints.

If your own viewpoint is your own assignment. How do we simulate that all this thing before that when you asking in a minimum ten years, five years from now, you have this way of making a judgment.

Drawing from the things that you've learned in professional practice so that you have some sort of ethical framework, so you know where to look for information. And it's not you simply agreeing to what the client says and what you've been told people who are responsible for your work are told you to do.

And when you get into positions of power, will you just perpetuate what power has already been removed or what people are already doing? And they are the skills that we would like for you guys to be able to practice and think through in the assignment in this subject.

So briefly we begin by going through the traits of a profession. And these are traits are true for every profession. Doctors, Louis, go in and we'll describe is there evidence of this and are they working well within the disciplinary matrix of architecture?

And so for example, there is altruism in the Architects Regulation. It's not just regulation. There are specific clauses that talk about acting on behalf of the public and engineering confidence.

That identifies the architect as an example. Higher learning is quite obvious, but higher learning is also continued professional development.

So the idea that you would just stop learning new knowledge after you finish university then make that if you've got a career or do you want to do more architecture innovation.

We'll talk about where the continuum between a professional and an occupation stops and start. And examples of where care work has progressively become more and more professionalized to the point where nurse applies that right now and documents.

And think about ways of how we might examine the profession. How there are power structures, how there are hierarchies, and the way that the profession functions right now may need to be changed and altered based on the relationships that you've used now, which is helping you.

And we'll talk about how a shift in the way we function needs to occur through recognizing their problems or an anomaly.

We have different types of practice at the moment. So for the typo, a revolution or wholesale change needs to occur. And once everybody believes that that is a new way of acting it becomes normal.

Five years ago, ten years ago in the profession, the idea of cultural knowledge being embedded in every project that we do, not necessarily because it's paid for, but you're aware of it, would have been under.

So you can see that in a short amount of time, things can change really rapidly. And that's happened through the competencies being SAL. And that has had an immediate effect on the university program.

And then the increase of cultural awareness and indigenous knowledge specialists and the demand for within practices. It may not affect how it's funded yet or whether clients are willing to pay for these this knowledge.

It's unknown whether it's actually having an effect on actual indigenous communities right now, because the projects may or may not be built yet. And if they have been built, they haven't been um measured yet.

But that is that's an example of where an anomaly has suddenly become over time and through systemic change for science.

So this is very um touching group. Okay. And so before I pass over to Peter, I'll just talk about how these follows need the assignments.

So as I described earlier, there's three assignments and twos, and these are the competencies that are part of them. Interestingly, there's only one competency in 2021 compared to 2019, which is about professional codes of conduct.

And in the past, there's a lot more about ethics. And so I would argue that it's a bit strange that that's no longer as important.

And it's purely about insurance, CPD, and codes of conduct. So ethical obligations does not seem to be part of these competencies anymore. And yet we would argue that they are extremely important because without that there's no exercise judgment and make some sort of determination between lots of things that are competing with one another.

And then there's been a whole series of complexities that outline very specific things that are obviously missing when the lacrosse tower by the curve.

So this has broken down contract administration into more smaller parts, including identification of approved substitutions. That goes specifically to the flammable fibre material, which did not exist as such an explicit of this in the past.

Understanding the principles of variation, request for information, practical completion. And so that also is off the back of the report's power.

And generally finding that architects were not doing this to the standard required, which is why there was slab slab cracking, you do south whales and some other examples.

So architects know they need to be doing this, but obviously this wasn't happening, which is why it's now a very clear competency that needs to be demonstrated that all architects that all students need to understand at uni and then also demonstrate that they've done some of this when they're in practice before they get registered.

Periodic site visits for quality assurance. Obviously, construction work is in this instance declining in quality. It requires architects who know what they're looking for in order to go on site and check that the work is being done adequately.

There's obviously lots of reporting and varying scope of services is the clients who might be saying don't do as much. We will reduce your scope, and then our text coming back and saying, Well, actually, we need to be involved, we're going to vary our services.

We need to justify why. So we can see that in response to things that have just been happening in the last six seven years, there's a whole series of different competencies that are now part of our assignments.

You'll see that the semester is divided up into loosely three parts, which I went through before, and there are topics that group that uh talked about in the lectures.

We also have people from industry come and speak from this individual board in this part one section. And then in part two when you're looking at um manifesto your manifesto for a practice, which is what would you apply to your own practice that has wholesale changes across the entire profession and the effect in the public?

Do you hear about the line, you'll hear about unions, you'll hear about ethics and the collective and practitioners, you'll hear about indigenous culture and the environment as the algorithm, as you might.

And then the final part is when you'll be um you'll be exposed to the design stages of an architectural project. So the typical sketch design, concept design, design development, contract documentation, contracting.

So just to reiterate this, all these different ideas and filter them through the codes, the legal instruments, the contracts, and you produce a series of assignments.

And that's what you're testing for. Are these ideas in the assignments, did you execute them through your code? And over the years many issues have appeared which we've been talking through in the lectures.

Okay, so these are just some examples of the assignments. So this might be an example of assignment one where individual parts of the profession are outlined, so you've got knowledge, the law and justice, the IBD, WACA, the university, the process of being um to go through registrations.

There are more examples on the environment sheets. But really there's no one way of doing this assignment. The idea that you're interested in redrawing this as you gain more knowledge through each of the lectures, it's not about a polished diagram.

You should be able to see your thought process. It shouldn't include in an abstract diagram. This is an example of a manifesto assignment. So it talks about things that would happen and change, but also talks about how you would change it.

What specific clause would be altered? Would you remove a clause? Would you amend it? Would you add one? Would you change the award system? Would you change pay rates? Would you change all of organization structure?

And then this is the final one, which is where there's a client architect agreement and letter, there's a simple works contract, and you go through the different parts of the contract in order to solve the problem and demonstrate that you executed discretionary judgment through that whole process.

But I'll just briefly, some of these ideas with what students have re-graduated and implemented them, so that who's going to come back and speak as part of the lecture series.

Was part of the NFCA competencies rewriting that included cultural competence. Mietar also looked at some of these ideas through major project discourse.

The thought learning public forums, what demonstrates it wasn't a bad architect, and there's a recorded mentality where we get people of government to speak about this.

There's been papers that have been written about what it means to write a professional practice course not through the lens of what we want to tell you but what you guys need to learn for the future.

And I'll go through some of these ideas as well. There's systemic well-being problems in those professions. Most people are undervalued, they feel overworked, they don't have.

How will the way you work in the future change? Will you fit into the system? Do you change the system? How are things that are being identified as problems now going to be different when you enter the profession?

Alright, so that's the intro to the subject and now we're going to introduce Peter who's going to do a lecture on the architect architecture and intervention.

Alright, break this out of it from in this point and we'll come back. Oh, don't go very well, but this in your work in the book. We met before? Yeah. Perfect two. Have you got like all the notes from the slide?

Yeah, very fast. If I couldn't cash up I just like take a photo. Yeah, that's what I was doing, for like diagrams and things, taking a photo is just things. And sometimes I ask myself why because they're gonna post on that.

You know what I mean? I'm never gonna look at these photos again. Yeah, exactly. I don't need to redo it again. It's kinda different. It's kinda different with the PS format I guess. Yeah, yeah, it does.

It looks a little bit different. But there are some similar things here I think. Hopefully translates over into this. Okay. Diagram things. Yeah, yeah. Yeah.

We work. Yeah. Yeah, it's a little bit more I don't know. Like yeah, I like all the I would say this is um cage And like for us to actually like deliver, especially like 100%.

Like the waterflies and stuff and like what you're going through like like structure and like from mechanical from electrical it's like physically changed and then the clients like only have like seven days.

Especially in a small practice. It's a few photo every single time. So like it's like not for the same side but like a couple more to say Yeah.

I so surprised that sti Steven Chew it is a chewdown, yeah. Yeah, in this platter side. It's gonna be crazy. Me?

Yeah. Uh the number three. Number two. Number three, but the room is five. Okay. Room five. You? I mean tutorial two.

Tutorial two. Room four. Similar to your friends. Yeah. Okay. You guys plan to work together again? No, it just happened. Uh okay.

I don't know it's gonna be trim of three or three mob two because last time we pair in three, yes. Right. Because last time our class is very small, it's just only one class, yeah.

And then like yeah you have to be group, so not too sure. So you guys need level nine? Right now.

Oh my god, last studio. So you can take the AAT or Popactory for this semester? You don't need to do? No, yeah. I'm doing it. You you're doing advanced, yeah.

I'm doing I'm doing an elective because I didn't do one last semester. So I'm just carrying it as a machine. And you're gonna do AAT with your major? No, I've still got another semester one.

Oh we eight? No, I'm level nine, but I underloaded in my free semester. Oh okay, okay, makes sense. Yeah. Okay. I just was confused. Uh uh Oh why?

Why why you can offload? So you're born here? Yeah and you live here. I could just yeah, I could just not do a subject so I can't uh jealous. That's a great way to do the architect career.

Yeah, yeah. Just trying to take a small city and not just I wish I could do that.

That too much. That too much, man. Oh shit Because I saw some the the note from the tutor yet that the person who began the semester from 2024 twenty-five last year.

We still need to do Pv3. I don't know, but I don't wanna do it. It's optional, yeah. I think it's gonna be fine. I think it's I think it's not useful, Pv three.

Yeah, because we did PP two and P three, the mixed version, so there's no point in us doing the exactly oh yeah it's quite boring uh but I think AT is gonna be useful.

But my friend told me the A T is crazy. Oh. I I can tell you gonna pair with like four like people in the group. Oh and they have so yeah and it's gonna be like really messy, you know.

That's okay, you can enjoy. It'll be better than professional practice. Agree with that. Oh Jesus Who knows? I uh technically options I'll be like finish in the first time.

I'll go to some three days. Like the five. No, I don't want to like Yeah, I'm gonna be a hangout.

What studio all you guys do in this mess? Oh I know that one but I don't know that one. Is that what what that's all about? Indigenous ah the flower things. Okay. That's one is great.

Wow. I think the I think the way they ex ex experiment their work is really in interesting. I mean indigenous sometimes is kinda like hard to understand, like because we from like outside the country yeah.

But the way how they like experimenting and sort of the project is really fancy. It's like something.

Three of them, yeah? The tilt? Oh my god, that three. Yeah. And she like we went on the side of the three. Alright. And then we've got to like uh just chill in And it's and and I also see the combination of the mixed generation of tutor, like the old the elder, mid-level and then young architects, oh my god.

Can we create combination? Fast words. I worked there before like in hospitality work. Yeah two hour like one and a half hour away from that. I can tweet myself another I don't work.

I think I'm on the side. Um that wasn't my fault. Um yeah I I'll thank we bring um I don't know within how many years ago um um I started um this I think I started finishing off my PhD and um you know some someone someone got sick or something like that.

But anyway, I found a really interesting um uh uh yeah, I spent a couple of years trying to write a PhD and um and when I was set in a professional practice course and I found like a really interesting place to be.

And then romantically like we'll like I was really interesting to talk about um architecture from the point of view of doing it um thinking about architecture um you know there's and it struck me at the time that there was really um there wasn't actually a conversation um that existed that I should that I you know that I had access to I guess that um where where we actually talked about architecture not instead talking about architecture like we talked as architect like we uh but but even um when we get back in our studio, we we will we seem to sort of adopt a sort of third person voice where we're talking like about the work.

And um but we don't talk from the point of view the view of doing it. Um interestingly I we we we hosted a little evening last week with some people from Harvard that put out uh a publication called Instruments of Service and one of the points that they made which which is what what they call instruments and service we would call our standards of practice.

What what constitution standards of practice. And I h hopefully I'll I'll end up talking about the standards of practice, but um but uh one this was with one of the editors of the magazine made was that the two senses the the the instruments the services and things like the sort of contracts and the um the employing conventions and just you know like what what it is that architects produce and then there's the second sense in which which we ourselves were instruments you know we we that that we were we were the and service was like um um we were in service of of of the client like we were the servants as well and you know like there was kind of like a there's sort of ambiguity um um about the relationship between those two things where where the instrument like what one of the things I think is that architecture is a kind of is a thing Once you put something into a certain um uh format, it becomes kind of lawful um and it and but it's sort of but our relationship to it you know um I something is sort of kind of procedural but it is all is all all it it''sll um and we can sort of see that in something like say RoboDeb or something, but but once something has gone into like a form and it it's in the right format, it actually has its own intentions, it actually has a legal status, it actually enables certain things.

And that our relationship to that that knowledge, to that, to that object that we've produced may not be one you know of a well our will or our intentions may not be the same as the object that we actually produce.

Um and this I feel I feel like we recognize this in all sorts of you know there's all sorts of places where I can I I can identify recognize this. But but whether we actually have like um whether we collectively in the room but also collectively in the in the profession have the adequate skills to be able to describe what it is that we do and and and to recognise our our relationship to it is is is quite questionable.

And so the the the rather than um this this talk um uh so over the last um ten or so years with some of the people in the room, um, and with the help of Helen and perhaps Anna and Claire and Simone and other people.

But we've been having this kind of conversation um and there's this being this feedback of the students. So I started coming up with a kind of theory or practice or one of a better description.

And over time it's been refined mostly by the students not accepting my theory. And then um but what I what I tried to do was to make the the initial idea of the course was to make things like um and this came from being on a teaching and learning committee um but it made making making the course the course requirements the actual subject of the course but we actually talk about like so just looking at the photo of Helen, she's talking about the course competencies um and what we're required to teach as and the the requirement to teach like like like sort of professional, like the sort of idea of professional competencies.

Rather than something that we just attain, is something that we recognize as being part of a kind of a system. And then we look at the system and then we want to identify the extent of the system, like um and what are the predicates of the system, like I guess predicate means like what must be you know, for there to be systems.

So I I guess you know, we're talking about trains, you know, the the predicate of that might be railroad tracks. You know, th th th there's no point in having a train without there being you know, a railroad track.

Um, so so we're required to also think by the law, but we need to like have a concept of the law. Like we need to recognize um and one of the things I think is really interesting about architecture is that that we could be in accordance with the law, which is one of the requirements of of of our actions as an architect, um but we could also be in breach of the law because we there could be more The interesting thing about the aspect is that they had their own law made on our behalf, but it only applies to us.

And it's different to contract laws so so we could be in accordance with the contract but be in breach of the law we are fact um and then but look so there's two so not only are there two laws but there's also two concepts of law.

So one is um the contract the law of contracts is such that um that we it's like a law that is writ, like like a um like when you if someone wrote a will that would be a writ law which is their wishes are like written into um like a story essentially of what's going to happen in the kind of future and then then there's a kind of um it is given some legal legal power.

Until the mid nineteenth century property took the form of law that was written, like, you know, my land is going to be handed down to my firstborn son or or whatever else.

And so it's like like a story through time. Then the the other type of law is laws of statute. And they're like um thou shalt not kill or um um they're they're things that are written by the Parliament um for special purpose.

Um and the s theoretically I guess there's sort of s kind of some sense of um the the challenge then is to kind of look at what is the object that that law applies to.

So the so it's a actually a complex situation and it requires like a um a sort of level of understanding. So the thing with the Lacos Fire, which is interesting, is that the the architects were were definitely in accordance with the contract that they signed, they acted in accordance with the contract that they signed, but they weren't in accordance with the kind of duty or the obligations they had under the Architects' Act to act on behalf of others.

And this is kind of as as Helen was actually saying as I walk in, this is sort of been made clear by the amendments to the Architects Act. Like for the Architects Act has a subclause which of Architect's regulation.

I think it's kind of a really interesting sort of um I what I think is our our situation is a lot more um both interesting and um uh and sort of perilous than than than um than than than what it th than what is actually sort of kinda understood.

So um one um one thing that um one thing that having taught the course for you know um We feel like that we've had good understanding from the students as to what we're talking about.

But we actually have a problem with the profession and we actually have a problem probably with you know the full time um which is that that it seems that um it seems to us that But it's not something that it's very hard to kind of communicate in one go.

There's lots of there's lots of it's not it's not one idea. Um and part of the problem I think is that architecture is not an intentional object. Like it's not something that has been built for a purpose, like by say a float, which has been built to float.

It's actually something that has actually evolved by the serory isies a of sort of um events and accidents and and and it's sort of taken on a life of its own. And and and what what the issue is that um and w when we're talking about the the people from Harvard the other day, they actually kind of sort of talked about looking at instruments of services as like what it is for architects made.

And I was sort of saying, well, I think we would end up with a very different conversation if we look looked at what it is that I cause. Um my example with um Charlotte Moltaire Barr's um I'm sure you're all familiar with her call for a merit a moratorium calling for no new buildings.

Um and and if you read her moratorium, which is actually quite a fascinating document, she talks about the effects or um or the relationship of you know climate change and um ecological collapse and social injustice and but but until we until we thought out what is architecture's relationships to the sort of widespread planetary disasters um that she perceived.

Many of things I think are things that you know maybe when you're enrolling into the course you thought that architecture could affect. But now that you're a master student, you know that you know our training has been to sort of suggest you that what's more important is um colour schemes or a formal composition or algorithm algorithms.

But I think since she's right, I think that she she has this very expansive idea of architecture and its agency. And um what what I think that the diagrams that that Helen is kind of showing you is to look at the sort of idea of the disciplinary matrix and to look at the idea of um you know like I think that architecture might be the design like well what is the thing that we design and what is the thing that we um what is the consequence of it what if we start to think about what is the consequence of there being architects, we would change like the difference between say Rem Koolhouse or Jarp Ingles or or ARM.

Instead of actually differentiating architects, what do we thought about? is What the consequence of there being architecture or mass and what is the thing that we collectively make through our combined efforts?

Like like so what is caused by architecture I think it' nots extra building. I think it actually is the kind of the very nature of the kind of construction industry and um itself.

What's caused by architecture is mortgages and finance and and and through mortgages and finance it's like who has access to those mortgages and finances.

What architects actually effectively do is they kind of encode they put they they encode and put things to the the market. And and in doing so they actually kind of create the market itself and and also the the so I guess we're represent we're representative of of theoretically at least like a third of the entire economy how do we go from recognizing what what Charles Moltaire suggests, but but but but answering her question uh as well which, is to which is to look at like what is the agency of architecture.

So traditionally so this table I drew up for all the people who teach professional practice in Australia uh participate in this forum that happens, you know, regularly once a month.

Um, where we sort of kind of talk amongst ourselves and this was like a table that I that that um that we sort of drew up um that looked at um looked at sort of um how looked at the sort of kind of mode of knowledge transmission um within the sort of within the subject itself.

So the first table I called kind of induced, which basically considers architecture as an input into a production process. So which has 10% fees or 8% fees whatever.

And that's the kind of cost into the building process. And so the the value of architecture is equal to the value caused by the architecture this this would be actually recognized as um Something like post-domestic product, so our contribution to the building industry would were equal to the cost of our collective wages.

Um there's kind of a it I I I I would argue that the way the profession understands itself, um if we look at all of all of the output of the profession in terms of like their submission to policy review um like a um or the it like when they if the architects regulation um like in January this year or December last year it went through a kind of a mandatory kind of regulatory review process and if you look at the solutions made by the architects, the schools of architecture and they're input into the process.

So they say that the buildings designed by architects, this is this is their own research, buildings designed by architects sell at a premium compared to to those not sold by architects.

So architecture itself is seen as a kind of a um like a premium product in the building industry and and the value is the value caused by architecture is is a premium, so like a maybe a 10% uh over a a house by a normal normal person.

So what they think of as being good um and you can see this in in in the information we're give you for mistake of an architect, but but even you know when John and Vivian get up and talk in front of you, like good design represents something that wins an architectural award.

And the aim of architecture seems to me in their eye in their ideas is is simply just um you know like uh 10% better than than a normal design.

And the what architects produce is buildings. So the business model of architecture is an input, is it's a cost input. The obligation the architect has is to and and and I I use the word proponent because that's like the sort of you know the agent the the agent we we in sort of common parlance the kind of the client.

Um so the client is the person who seems to be paying for the building. If it's a school, it's to the headmaster or something like that. Their ethics is personal. So this is the thing that Allenberg Fraser so so aptly demonstrates in their case on the cross fire is that they um they that there's no distinction between their personal ethics like and you can sort of see that with the with the architects where they they sign up to the kind of um net zeros in the workplace kind of policies or or um you know the the ethics is kind of an opt-in thing as conditional it's non-obligatory um and it's and and and and it's stuff that they they make up they make up as they go along.

So you know I I think it's kinda really interesting that that we put your our hands up and said who would not design a prison um or a migrant detention centre like you know, I'm I'm hoping there'd be a lot of hands to draw into that.

Um but I don't I I I think that's kind of an interesting question, like should we design and and maybe by the end of this talk maybe some of you will come prison designers.

For for for reasons which aren't obvious. So when we use the word competition the i if we're talking to the profession the practitioners of which these people are practitioners by the way.

Um and this is like something that comes up in the you know in in architecture particularly from the nineteenth century but but is is that competition is what what what's what what what does competition mean it's like um um we're competing for the design, like we're c you know, like the competition.

May it may extend to winning a contract like a project, but but basically architects are mostly interested in, you know, is ARM betterine than l.

Um regulation they do as a constraint. Um uh um education like like and um should they they then like when when they're on our course advisory committees um well I actually sit on the Institute's Education Committee and a couple other committees that are through with architecture and education.

For the professions, a hundred percent of what they're actually interested in is paying. They're input into the course is to encourage us to do more reverse. Never once do never once did they sort of say we should be read land.

Um uh you know so I um the legal concept I guess um is mostly contract law. They they they have very if we talk to architects about the laws of um of duty and obligation, um even even test it out on your on your tutors, like like like can they make it the what is you know, what is the legal concepts of law they'll be quite good at in terms of contracts, but they will not be very good at it in terms of of um duty and obligation.

Um The form of capital uh they because they see um architecture as a uh as a as a as an hourly rate, the the capital that they that that they they're considering is mostly um human labour.

Um and um I'm not quite sure why I said um uh That model leads to of architecture being an input into into a production process leads to like a particular form of contract.

And these are provisional, like I'm not quite sure if I'm 100% right about all these things. I guess the university is a completely different model. The university, um even the fact that we use the word universe means that that we're shifting from um something that is kind of um law as rich kind of model of of the sort of labor um architecture as labor um sort of um thing.

So the university the university is much more you know thou child not kill type of law, like a sort of principle that that that um applies always.

Um but we're sort of interested um we're sort of interested in truth at the university. So universe the universes what what what is universal in the university is like the method by which we determine the truth or something is.

And so clauses that have to do with reason, like the architect must must be reasonable. Um the reasonable part of it is that, and we notice this in science studios, is that the what we're looking at is something that is actually able to be transmitted from one person to the next.

There's an efficacy that that is caused through that um in terms of um uh it's a performative nature of the universals books that that universities are actually interested in.

We're interested in teaching like a method that is actually repeatable. And I guess in some sense that it relates to the idea of trust and confidence.

So that if you you you're willing to take a vaccine because you're convinced that it's actually going to work.

But also if everybody takes if everybody if that conf trust and confidence in that vaccine is widespread, we get her immunity and there's kind of like a greater benefit than than uh than just treating every individual patient.

And I think that the the that we should we should look at what is the what's the difference between a university education and and a sort of um and a and a training, like a tape kind of training.

Um so there there is a sort of sense of um of a a duty and obligation to kind of follow the rules um and to be in accordance with the law, because there's a benefit of it being the law.

And this is where we get into the idea of the greater good. So in the first example of training, the good is actually the commodity that we or the thing that the tangible thing that we produce, which seems to be a building.

And the second one, the tangible thing that they've actually produced is confidence and trust. Um and it actually leads to like a much like it were to look and and this is one of the things that I've been looking at, if it were to look at a dollar value associated with this, this would be and and um I have a footnote here of Russo of a law giver.

But Russeau um he he he kind of speculated that it wasn't um that he he speculates that it isn't actually um you know in the seventeen fifties but he speculates that it's not actually a multiple, but an algorithmic thing, like it's a many multiple.

But the difference between the what is actually produced, the value of that, um in economics terms is just simply the cost of it.

Whereas what is actually produced by confidence and trust in the system itself could be a multiple of you know ten or a hundred times the value of the good that is actually produced.

You know, because it's actually in effect so the the greater good is the system itself. And so the university is actually about training people to actually work in accordance with the system because the system itself is inherently producing like uh confidence and trust in the system.

So I mean my example is, you know, if you're sitting outside the Bangladesh Olson shop and there was a guy on a white band selling televisions out the back, how much less would you pay for that television than going into the store and buying one from Bangladesh Olson?

Their TVs are quite expensive, I probably would consider buying it from the white banks. But the principle is that you would pay a lot more in the store, but you're getting other things in the store, like you're capacity to resell it like service contract and a warranty and and the fact that you're actually confident that it is a bummer also TV.

But then we would actually have to teach you a whole lot of different sets. So the the basis of the fee would not be an input into the cost. It would be actually like a fee for the entire system, including your education.

And your maintenance, the maintenance of the system itself, which is your furthering education. All these things that we're starting to kind of see um in the slides of how I was putting forward.

So when we're determining what is the basis of the architectural fee, historically, it is actually been based on the price attained.

Um so the architects the role of the architect is to put something to the market and to sign a contract between the builder and the client. The architect's fee was adjusted to the market price.

So we're much much it's completely different to the cost of the hourly range to produce the board. It's actually based upon the agreed market value of the project through a competitive tender process.

So the obligation is not to the client but to the profession or it's to the university in itself. So if we were to teach this, if we were to take over the history course as well as just the professional practice course, we would have a very different history course.

We would not teach buildings in time or the lives of Luca Bussier and V Sandereau and this merry band of adventurous modernists.

We would actually change the history of the profession. Like when certain laws came into existence, when certain practices started to emerge, um different types of contracts, how they how they they they came into.

So the the guys that we're talking to from Harvard were they seemed kind of even more radical than us in the sort of sense that but I would date the profession of architecture to the fire of London.

It's the first time we can see all the aspects of profession starting to kind of emerge. Because the architects at that prior to that, all all building laws was heard basically when the problem occurred.

Like so in the Bible, when the parapet falls off the building and kills the passing the passer by the architect actually is held responsible and has to give either their firstborn child or or or failing that one of their flames.

Go into the base. So the duty to the the duty um so in the architect we see the first of all we have to be in accordance with the law, but then the law requires that we maintain the confidence in the profession.

And the confidence in the profession, I I think we need to think about that in a way where we have to then ask the question, what is caused by the confidence in the profession? You know, is it the willingness of the the builders to tender for our projects, uh to participate in the processes that we set up of sort of market formation.

But the the actual for for for for the authority just you know to say this is that, which is like the the question about you know you just clanning what you specify or or or is it an equivalent?

Um and and so it's just sort of the authority that's given to the architect by the law, that we must maintain confidence in. So this understanding is not the common understanding, it's something that you can't come up using your sort of own personal concepts.

Like I would say that the fact that the profession hasn't come up with this formula that I'm presenting on a diagrammatic scheme here suggests that it is only a product of higher learning.

You know, we have to read some of the literature, you know, some of the books that that actually um so professional practice wasn't thought at university um you know um in university courses um until the universities required it so so Carlton uni um there was no professional practice component of the architectural course at RMIT until RMIT became a university, I think in about 1978.

There was no professional practice part of the course at Melbourne University until the university, because it was the it was only a diploma, it was a two-year diploma course that was held between 1914 and 1948.

The university said we want to get rid of all the diploma courses in 1948, and they said it has to become a university course, and that's the first time we see so it's a requirement of the universities that there is uh but we have professional practice and and in that sense what they were requiring was ethics, like um which would be called um um sort of diantology.

And it was only kind of forgetting it was only the the import of the profession into the university courses which led it to become you know like sort of like sort of part kind of course.

So professional ethics at the university would be um would revolve around the concept of duty. And the the the the person who we should read um with respect to that would be would be Kant.

So Kant writes genealogy morals in in the um eighteen early eighteen eighties. Um which is sort of about the same time it's a sort of a reflection in some sense on um Rousseau's the sort of social contract.

But it it social contract funny enough has a lot of contract theory in it, which is interesting. And we see that the the the the this is the same time that the um this completely coincides with the Royal Academy starting to teach architecture courses and also the sort of moves towards forming sort of professional associations.

We have a diagram we can photos. Competition, the competition in if we go through my graph, we whereas um you know the way architects think about competition is designed, the competition would be more based on um um sort of tendering and the competition of building like the actual what is what what what what what is competitive would be the sort of functioning of the market, the supplies of materials or competition or alternative products, like the the thing that is actually caused by the university model would be the actual construction industry itself.

Education is no longer training but would be would be learning. And we could talk about what learning Yeah what what what teaching learning revit is not learning.

It's just strange. Um you know and the the the the learning to train might there might be a learning, there's obviously a learning component in most of what what you do, but there's also a kind of a training component in what's what you do.

It's expected that it's a learning component. The legal concepts would be less risk but would be more bit more um the legal concepts would be more sort of statutory law, um in which case there's a lot less variation in interpretation.

What what is interpreted in statutory law would be the situation, uh whether the law applies to the situation, whereas in law of which the situation kind of becomes the law, like so we can talk about that in the future.

The concept of capital um uh I I I I I I put in work here, but I think that the concept of capital would be more like things like social capital, so like the authority of the architect um the the legal status of what architects say um has has a kind of capital.

So for instance a good example of that would be if we um put in for a planning permit, like say this building next door, and they said well everywhere else in South Carleton um we have the kind of 10-story height limit, but because this is a prominent site and is architecturally significant, because we speak from the point of view of of the subject architect, like that building's now and 80 stories high, which is a huge, so there's a kind of sense of cultural capital is also like an architectural feature.

Um the size the size of the city is is like sixty or seventy storeys of um extra real estate. So there is actually a monetary value that is associated with our work.

Like we actually kind of produce capital through this sort of process. You can lend against the you can lend like the architect's description is actually the cause of capital, like it's the excess on the value of the property, which is the future value of the property, realized in in today's terms.

And and the car marks identify the Okay. And then the contract the third option that we actually have is to think about this in terms of And I and I think that the university model is that there is a third option, which is I think would be a lot easier to teach, which would be would require a lot more trust from the students, which which we go straight to the concepts that we actually need um and to come to it from a point of view of um um in which case the the instead of actually um the object of architecture being a project, the object would actually be the subject of architecture itself.

Um there's a whole kind of series of things. In the in the vein of the course, I think what we're trying to do is we're trying to shift I hope that makes something So you can go to and then um Um I'll send an email out if anybody wants to meet Chasor and if you would like to um five or I'll be showing uh Oh, don't make that hopefully and uh um and not get the heat