As the traditional custodians of the land on which we meet today, I pay my respects to their elders, past and present, and extend that respect to all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders.

As we consider the responsibilities of architects and the public consequences of decisions about land in the built environment, we acknowledge that this place has been always been known, cared for, and shaped through systems of knowledge and responsibility extending over countless generations and talk until you're more concepted.

So today we are asking a very simple question: why does the architect act exist at all? And if architects could simply compete in the market like any other service provider, why do governments care?

A special legal category of architects. So the argument we will be talking about runs through these lectures is that the Act does more than protect consumers from incompetent individuals?

It establishes the conditions through which architecture can operate as a public and collective discipline rather than only as a commercial service. So the Act gives legal form to a relationship between knowledge, authority and responsibility.

It identifies who may claim the role, what obligations accompany that claim and how that person remains publicly accountable. So we will start from early formation of architects as a learned profession through the establishment of institutes and registration to contemporary questions of whether these institutions still maintained the public purpose that justified their existence.

So So to begin with, George Beaton's definition helps us distinguish a profession from an occupation, which we've seen before, and how it requires specialist skills.

So a profession is supported by high learning, disciplinary knowledge, autonomy, ethical obligations, which is altruism, institutions and a commitment to public benefit.

And these traits take institutional form through the university, which we're in today, professional bodies, registration boards, legislation or the law, codes, exams, research, which you guys will be familiar through the university, insurance, disciplinary processes and practice, which you might hear more about today from the AIBB and I'll introduce them later.

The important thing is that these traits are not personal possessions. An individual cannot simply announce that they are autonomous or that they are ethical or professionally authoritative.

Those qualities become only credible through institutional relationships. And so throughout the lecture, we're asking two questions. First, what professional trait does a particular institution or clause try to make reliable?

And second, what happens when these connections between the trait and the institutional mechanism weakens? Do we get the result that we have today?

And does the profession continue to have some of the problems that have always plagued it. It's a way to understand what happens now based on history and also what we can find in the institutions.

So before architecture became an organized profession, there was no single clearly bounded occupation equivalent to contemporary architects. The design and construction of buildings were distributed amongst master buildings, surveyors, engineers, class people, patrons and practitioners trained for workshops and apprenticeships.

So most of what you see all through the nineteenth century in your history subjects. Authority came from practical experience, reputation, patronage, social networks, and mastery of drawing, geometry and construction.

The architect existed as a role before architecture existed as a properly regulated profession. So they were architects for but they were not necessarily regulated in the same way that exists today.

A person might design a building, supervise construction and negotiate with a patron, normally the church or the state, but there was no universal existence qualification.

There were no enforceable codes or public register determining who could claim architectural authority. And this doesn't mean that buildings were produced with that expertise. It just meant that expertise was recognized through the personal and the local system rather than some common professional institution.

So we use examples like the Medici Chaplin Follows the RSE. And we signal that professionalization starts somewhere around the Great Fire of London.

So wholesale fire that destroys a city and requires many things to be built all at once. So it can't be done incrementally like much of the European cities up to that point.

And then we picked that against the industrial revolution. And then we've got this in the opera house as a case study that you guys will look at later on in the semester. And some of the beginnings of learned educational institutions in Europe.

So the Institution of British Architects was founded in 1834 and received a royal charter in eighteen thirty-seven. Its initial purpose was not to license architects, and that's really important for Britain.

It was to advance architectural knowledge, improve education, establish standards, and consolidate architecture's status as a learned profession. Much like a lot of the other professions in the UK.

This was not simply bringing people together, they were consolidating knowledge. And this is different to Australia, which I'll go over in a moment.

So Francis Bacon's image, Carnel, is useful here as it represents knowledge, travelling through travelling beyond established boundaries, and the columns suggest civilization and inherited order.

The ship represents inquiry moving into the unknown. And this idea of columns representing civilization and pairings and things propping up civilization and knowledge appears quite a lot in the crests for the Royal Institute of Architects and the Australian Institute of Architects.

So importantly a royal charter created more than an association of individual people. It gave the Institute some public recognition and authorise it to represent a field of knowledge.

The institute could establish membership, conditions, examinations, publications, prizes, collections and standards through which architecture understood itself. It wasn't one person. You could be sure that if you were going through Reba or the AIA or Reba at the time, it meant something more than just individual people.

I'll go on that little longer. The charter therefore gave institutional form to a proposition. Architecture was not only an activity sold by individuals, it was developing a body of knowledge capable of contributing to civic life.

So this is the Reba motto and Clark and their Latin motto roughly translates to for the use of the people, for the glory or ornament of the city.

The motto defines architecture through its public efforts. And it's clear here that buildings should be serving people while contributing to the civic and cultural character of the city.

This is not just a statement about supporting architects. It's asking the individual architects to contribute to society. And the plaque makes this institutional identity visible in the built environment.

It marks a project as having been recognized through a collective disciplinary process. People have come together, decided what they're doing, decided this is what represented them and decided to come together as a collection of people.

You didn't have to be part of the institute to practice as architects. So you can see this is sampressed and motto on their journal in 1805.

Brever to net um today often speaks of advancing architecture for so the contemporary language is clearer, more inclusive, but the historic model retains a valuable precision.

Professional advancement is justified by use, civic dignity and public benefit. So the early history of Reaver's awards is really revealing.

I don't want to finish up that here. Um but in eighteen thirty six the first silver medal was awarded to George Goodwin and it wasn't for a building, it was for an essay on the nature and properties of concrete, which is really less about the individual achievements of one building and really about what is something that can be shared collectively, what is going to be useful for all architects.

The medallion therefore allows us to recover a different understanding of professional advancement. Recognition was not confined to visual distinction, authorship, or celebrated buildings.

It included research, technical inquiry, and the circulation of useful knowledge. And this is important for argument about collective responsibilities. Members were not legally liable for one another's work, but they did participate in an institution where standing depended upon the knowledge, competence and the conduct of its individual members.

Collective responsibility means responsibility for maintaining the systems upon which professional authority depends on education, standards, debate, archives, research, and public trust.

It does not mean that it's necessarily always about the individual and the errors that one might make. So you can see here the motto is on their bronze doors, that's the entry to the Royal Academy Burlington House, which is their headquarters, and they hold an extensive library.

So Rebus Building and Library made the idea of a learning profession physical. The institution accumulated drawings, photographs, books, manuscripts, models, and records that no individual practice could maintain alone on their own.

And these collections preserve architectural knowledge across generations. They allow passwords to be examined, compared, and challenged, and Rebus supports research actively. They publish technical and policy material and treat knowledge production as part of their institutional role.

And the lesson here is not that every professional institute must reproduce Riva, but it's that institutes cannot credibly claim to advance architecture only by promoting members or completed buildings.

Advancement requires mechanisms to identify questions, permission evidence, preserve knowledge, and translate research into practice and public policy. The building therefore represents more than just headquarters.

It gives a physical home to the collective memory and continuing inquiry of the discipline. So now let's turn towards the Australian profession.

Australia developed differently. Architectural institutes formed first in separate colonies and states, Victoria in 1856, New South Wales in 1871, and later by the other states elsewhere.

The national organization was not established until 1929. So you can see there's about 80 years where states are operating individually and can they decide we're going to do something together.

So J. M. Freeland describes the early profession as institutionally uneven, affected by personal rivalries, unstable membership, and substitute activity.

Specifically, he talked about New South Wales, um spending a lot of their time on magazines that talked about critical opinion and he seemed to support the Victorian one, which was much more about the institutional, disciplinary, procedural policy knowledge.

We would really argue that this has kind of come through state-based as well. Um, New South Wales continues to have a much more robust debate in the public sphere around things that architects are doing and a critique on um planning and politics.

So I'll put a few references up um afterwards, but you know, there are people like Elizabeth Bowley, Sandra K. Joe Grady, these are people who actively have columns um that they write monthly um or frequently talking about what the architectural profession is doing in the context of New South Wales.

We have really not had that kind of commentary. So that public intellectual is not so strong here. So education, professional association, and later registration developed through completely separate state systems from technical colleges, unions, training and institutional exams.

So the National Institute's task was therefore to integrate. And And the AIA's motto at the time was we advance our art together.

And the emphasis turned to geographically dispersed and competitive practitioners and trying to get them to be capable of sharing knowledge standards and representation.

Where Reba is a relatively central learned institution, Australia began with fragmentation and later attempted national coordination. And that difference remains important today.

The UK is much smaller, they've got a higher population, they've got higher membership, and in Australia, the state-based chapters continue to have quite different visions for what they would like to pursue.

What's happening in Tasmania and WA and the Northern Territory and ACT does not have the same commercial imperatives that happen in New South Wales and Victoria.

And so it means that states often are doing their own things and there's the national um AIA does exist, but it's definitely not as cohesive.

So I think it does um stem back to the origins of how these were set up. So let's move on to the Architects Act. A voluntary institution could establish expectations for its members, but it could not identify, examine, examine, or discipline everyone offering architecture services.

And so what this meant was there was a case for statutory registration. If architecture affects public safety, amenity and the quality of the built environment, should its standards depend only on voluntary membership of a private association.

And at the time it was beginning to be seen that it should be. Victoria considered registration from at least eighteen eighty seven and enacted the Act Texas Registration Act in nineteen twenty two.

So this was debated, you know, for 60, 70, 80 years. And it was absolutely because of all the different states. Therefore, um the first statutory registration only occurred in 1923.

So it's about 100 years. The Act established a public board, a register who you will a register of architects, recognized varied education and experience pathways, and an authority that was derived from parliament rather than institutional membership.

Registration was preventative as well as reactive. Contract enemagments will could respond after loss occurred, so that's just um common law, that's not specific to the Act.

But registration made recognised competence and accountability visible before something went wrong. So importantly only twelve of the first 33 registrants were members of the Royal Victorian Institute of Architects.

So you can see 33 people registered, only 12 were part of the Institute at the time, in 1922. Statutory boundary was therefore not simply a state-protected version of institute membership.

It was public frameworks, capable of recognizing practitioners through multiple pathways. An institute would define aspiration and advance the discipline, the board would determine who satisfied the legal conditions for registration.

So I think that's fine. Um so these are some of the institutional, uh the Estrate Institute of Architects, the work that they do.

Can I have a slide on the leave? I can't see it now, it's all right. Um The Australian Institute building is on is um on the corner of Linders Lane and Exhibition Street.

So maybe I'll put that slide up as part of the slide pack. It provides a contemporary physical expression of national coordination and yet the institution remains federated through every state and territory.

This voluntary membership organization advocates for architecture publishes guides like this. It has some continuing education for members. The most visible thing that you guys probably see are the awards and events, and it provides a collective voice for the profession, for the people who are part of the institute anyway.

Registration remains separate and is administered by state and territory boards, and this distinction matters. The institute enables architects to act together, the act enables society to hold architects accountable.

And registration establishes a minimum legal threshold. The institutions the these two institutions should remain connected, but it's interesting there are other models where they collapse together.

So in the medical profession, they're part of the same thing. In architects' case, one body represents architects who cannot substitute for independent public regulation, while the regulator is concerned with minimum standards and it does an advanced architectural culture.

So the College of General Practitioners, as a model, they are part of the same thing. And some um in the medical profession might critique that as it's has too much power.

But I think it's an interesting um counterpoint because they are able to mandate CPD consistently across the entire profession. It's not reliant and they can be you know the advancement can be translated into the education.

A B D C D. So some of these other slides show the things that um the AIA has. So it represents some of the qualities that we've been talking about, altruism, they have a code of professional conduct, which you guys will look at in more detail for the manifesto.

And they submit policy submissions. They also have acronym guidance notes, they have professional resources, and this is their form of knowledge production and collective representation.

But we would argue that the contemporary profession is too dispersed for one membership body to undertake every task. Research, workplace reform, climate action, they've actually now been developed across a wide network of organizations.

And the AIA, which which if you know perhaps it wasn't so unwieldy, perhaps if the states were not so different in their concerns, would be doing something much more collective.

So some examples that we have here include I'll just go through this one. So you guys are already aware of the national standards of competency for architects.

So this is a connection across all the fragmented systems. It needs accreditation accredited education, practical experience, assessment and registration by describing the capabilities expected of an architect.

Separate universities and state registration boards can therefore refer to a shared framework. So it's the same regardless of what university you go to.

But competency is not a complete definition of a profession. Procedures can be stated and assessed relatively clearly, but professional literacy, we would argue, identity and judgment are much harder to codify because they depend on context, relationship, and competing obligations.

The NSCS establishes a common baseline for entry. But education must still explain why these obligations exist, how authority is distributed and when following a procedure is not enough.

And that's what we argue for professional practice. So other universities only have some might have only one subject and it's completely about delivering the competencies. We're lucky to have two and some we used to have three, and the universities also have three.

We think that's a really good opportunity to work out where does competencies stop and where do these other ideas come out? Relationships, competing obligations, professional literacy, identity and judgment.

And that can't necessarily be taught through a checklist. So we have the architects registration board, which you'll hear from today, but to expand on what they do, they represent the statutory side of professional authority in Victoria.

And it's different for the Institute because it doesn't represent architects. It's delegated by parliament and has to prioritize public protection. So a modern regulator cannot protect the public only by admitting people to arrest a respondent after misconduct occurs.

CPD, practical guidance and compliance education, systemic risk research, attempt to intervene before poor practice becomes accepted culture. And I have to say that this has only happened in the last it was mandated I think in twenty twenty two CPD being delivered by the AB ARBV and before then there wasn't any.

So it does show that over in the last couple of years off the back of across towns that there was a recognition that there was a big gap in the profession and this is now being rectified.

And even though that CPD does exist, you can still freely do other CPD. So there is something about remember changed the act recently to um to have specific CBD that everybody should be doing as opposed to you choose your own.

So the regulator must learn how practice is changing, where scope is being removed, where agreements fail, and how unregistered staff are supervised, where conflicts arise and which procurement method models repeatedly separate authority from responsibility.

So we'll hear more from Glenn Spox and a few other people from the ARV film this. ARBV does do research, it turns isolated complaints into evidence in that system and they turn this into education.

And they talk about professional behaviour and this guidance makes expectations visible before they're breached. That's what they're trying to do anyway. They don't want a whole series of architects designing buildings where they didn't understand their legal obligations and then many buildings, multiple buildings um caught fire through um procurement processes that involved innovation and then architects were left um confused about what they were supposed to be doing.

Some of the other member-based organisations are Architeam, which is a collective for small practices. So Archie Team responds to the practical needs of small and sole practices through peer support, resources, professional development and collective access to insurance.

Its insurance arrangements are useful here because it shows insurance as both financial protection and collective discipline. So as part of IC team you are you buy into one that is being bought by IC team as a collective and you have a small share at that insurance.

So it's assumed that you're not going to be doing work that is hugely complex and hugely expensive. The budgets are not going to be very high. And it's also assumed that if you're doing work that potentially is going to um be in breach of that insurance, you can't be part of that collective.

And so we can see that insurance um Um is one example through RT team anyway where there's this sense of the collective.

If one individual person does something that puts the entire collective into ill repute, it is possible that they cannot be part of architecture in their insurance policy.

Some other examples, I've just got, you know, they develop disciplinary knowledge as an example of the things that are being discussed in your diagrams. Architects declare emerge because practitioners believe that established institutions are not responding quickly enough to the climate and biodiversity emergency.

It's important here that you can see that a specialist body can identify an emerging public obligation before legislation and membership organisations have adapted.

Its value depends on converting declaration into evidence, practice and policy. And adaptable ASA, which is all architecture universities in New Zealand and Australia as a collective institution.

The double ASA connects the architecture schools that produce and test disciplinary knowledge before registration. And I think its role reminds us that education is not just about preparing for employment.

Schools also question existing practice and develop knowledge the profession will require in the future. And this one is Parla, which you might have heard about.

It emerged from research into gender equity in architecture. It publishes guides, data sets and advocacy. And it shows how evidence can expose structural problems that established institutions have normalized or overlooked, which we would argue that the AIA at the time was not thinning enough.

Its broadest significance is its methodology. Identify a gap, research it, create practical instrument, and change the terms of professional debate.

We would argue that a learned profession should have recognized equity as central to who enters and lead within architecture, rather than leaving this work to the margins, which is what Parliament was at the time, and now it's much more established.

And the strength consulting architects. The ACA addresses the business, procurement and employment conditions under which architectural work is produced. Registration identifies who may claim professional authority but it does not create fair employment, viable fees, adequate scope or well managed practices.

And yet those conditions directly affect whether architects have enough time, skill and organisational capacity to meet their public obligation. You can't meet your public obligations if your business is not functioning properly.

The ACA therefore fulfills an important gap between regulation and disciplinary culture. And you can see that together these specialist organizations show that professional advancement is now occurring through a network.

It's not occurring through one institutional body. And the central question is therefore, does the institute connect and amplify that knowledge adequately?

It's almost like it is unwieldy to begin with, it's too difficult to get things through, so there are other branches that emerge. And then instead of being able to have one court issue, they all have to consult with each other.

So across all of these, we would argue that the gaps have been filled, that they should have been addressed in the first place.

Smaller organizations can be more agile, focused, and accountable to groups whose concerns are diluted within a broad membership body. But we would argue the Institute's responsibilities should be to reveal, connect this research experience, and translate these emerging concerns into a national debate, professional brightness, advocacy, institutional reform, and the award system.

And I think the persistent Australian problem is not an absence of institutions, we seem to have many of them, it's that they are fragmented. No single body clearly holds together education, regulation, research, employment, practice conditions and public purpose as a coherent account of how architecture should advance.

Whereas a functioning national institute should provide that connective intellectual role. It should ask what knowledge is being generated across the profession, what problems remain unrepresented, and how will those insights be converted from specialist cases into shared professional responsibility.

So now just very briefly for some context. This is a map broadly of different regulatory requirements for the architecture profession.

There's not one universal model, but there are some dominant ones. Some jurisdictions protect the title architect, others reserve areas of practice, signing authority and approval.

Some regulate nationally, like Australia, Canada, Germany and the US. Some of them rely on state and regional systems.

And some of them rely heavily on voluntary recognition. And so Denmark, Sweden, Finland are examples of this. Canada, USA, Australia, and Germany are the partial ones that are based on state, and then there's a few that are nationally regulated.

But the question we ask here is how does society identify who may claim professional authority and what obligation accompanies that claim. Some contemporary academics, like Peggy Diemer, they have a critique of the American system, and she argues that um because the architect is a worker, licensure can regulate entry and public responsibility while doing little about wages, hours, insecure employment or workplace hour.

She argues that the models in Finland, Sweden and Denmark where there is no um licensure or registration is a good way to start from scratch or to require something that is much more about a collective because there is not this fragmentation.

In this subject, we argue that licensure and labour organisation addresses different problems. And registration protects the public claim of the architect, and in Australia, unionism protects workers in relation to employers.

And we don't think that removing registration would necessarily improve labour conditions, which is a big concern in America. So our position is that a credible position requires both public accountability and worker power and we'll return to labour organizations in a later lecture when we talk to the architecture in it.

So just briefly, um this is just an example of some of the other um countries so you can see regulation happens in the US through individual states um and then they have a national council of architectural registration boards where they administer education and they too have an institution with headquarters in Washington.

A strong licensing structure may protect public authority while leaving employment conditions to entirely different institutions. So it's the same that this is voluntary and every practicing architect must be regulated and it's based on the states.

There's a very similar model um in India, but it's national. And the Indian Institute of Architects is a professional association.

The Council of Architecture in the middle maintains the statutory register and controls the legal use. And so you can see in these situations they're separated nationally or sub-nationally and they have distinct functions.

Oh, that was the slide that I was after, George Whitman. Um I wanted to go through specific parts of the Architects Act, which originated in nineteen ninety one and the Architects Regulations which have been updated in twenty twenty six.

And we're looking at these clauses not so that you can memorise them, but so that we can consider what professional relationships is this clause trying to create and what professional trait is it attempting to make really reliable.

So you can see here registration is written into the Act. It tells you it is the purpose of this Act is to regulate the professional contact with architects, to deal with complaints, to regulate the term architect, architectural services and design, and it's done through the ARBV or the Architects Registration Board of Victoria.

It also talks about the need for professional indemnity insurance and public liability insurance. So you can see that architects are engaged and paid by clients.

I'll see if I can find that one. You can see some examples of where altruism appears, so to act honestly and with reasonable care.

And the word care I think is important here. It points to the idea that it is not a business or a product. It is being responsible for somebody else and that might be the client or the public.

There's also the idea that skills and expertise uh skills and experience and thorough knowledge should be maintained. And this points to disciplinary knowledge.

It's not acceptable through the Act to just be designing buildings and documenting buildings without thorough knowledge.

And that definition is something that the profession defines. What is this knowledge? It is administered through CPD. I would argue the problem with that is up until recently CTD was piecemeal.

So knowledge depended on what people had time to learn about as opposed to what everybody should be learning.

And we see examples of autonomy. So an architect must not sign, check, approve, or supervise drawings that they didn't actually check, approve or supervise.

And that sounds really obvious, but it's not saying what is being supervised or the details of it. It's simply saying if you claim you're an architect, you need to be acting in a way where the work you have done was actually done by them.

And you would be surprised how much work gets done by people who are not architects and who have not been supervised. Um and higher learning is egg to the university.

So the board determines qualifications and experience required for registration, it regulates the exams, it approves the schools and the accredited courses, it holds the exams, it appoints the examiners, and it issues and can cancel certificates of registration or approval.

And so you can see that there's a whole system that is required in order for all these universities across the whole state and countries to have something consistent.

And it's important to think about higher learning not just this university, but that bigger system beyond these walls and what that means for the profession.

We can also see here that the idea of potential conflict of interest between the architect and the client, or an architect or somebody else, should be made clear.

Now, potential conflicts of interest could be when an architect develops software or technology or construction technology that they have ownership over and they only document for that product to be used or that construction system to be used, they have the potential to gain more than if it went to market.

And so in these situations it's explicit that's a conflict of interest, it must be declared, and the client and the public should know that that is something that can happen.

So we'll ununtangle that um later in the good and the bad architect and the difference between somebody who is entrepreneur versus somebody who is innovating.

There's also the idea within the architects regulations that one must resign a contract if they feel like they're going to breach the act. So this idea that you have an obligation to your client and your business and getting paid and that that is above everything else is different to what the act says.

The act says if you feel like you'll be paid but you will do something that's going to breach this act, you should withdraw your services. And that gives you power over what you should or should not be doing as an architect.

Architects can't mispresent misrepresent involvement in a project. So that seems very obvious, but it means that that individual, once they are registered, are being held to a higher standard because Because these clauses describe somebody doing something potentially beyond um just against their own individual uh needs and asks them to be um acting clearly and being being able to declare everything that they're doing.

Um they shouldn't be falsely representing architects' authorship. And this one about the individual and the collective.

An individual should be of good character. It elevates the individual beyond the ethical obligations of just one person. And gives a definition to say you act in a higher way because you are registered.

And in here, to be consistent with other architects, so to maintain the standards and integrity of the profession of architecture. So it's directing somebody to the profession of architecture, not you as an architect.

So you can see that there both those things are true in the Architects Act. And finally, the important one, which is a duty to engender confidence and respect for the profession.

An architect by their conduct must endeavour to engender confidence in and respect for the profession of architecture. That might be acting against the interests of the individual, but there's a balance between the two.

And I think the act is often seen as something procedural, something you might have to encounter during registration, and if something goes wrong. And yet a lot of the decisions that architects make on a daily basis would need to be tested against this.

Not to say that business, market forces, external forces don't affect the individual's decisions, but can they be thought of in the context of what the act is asking all architects to do?

So for example, I'll have another one here, public trust. So the tribunal may direct public inquiry. If something if somebody is seen to be um doing something against the registration board and somebody complains to the registration board there needs to be a fair trial or a tribunal and it's publicly accessible.

You can see people on the registration website have who have had inquiries. Um and you can see their names and their numbers.

So without that system, this wouldn't The idea that the AIBB can provide licensure and remove it makes it enforceable.

And another one about public good of others. Or is that repeat? That's a repeat. The architect may go to tribunal if they're careless or incompetent, and if they've seen to have exhibited unprofessional conduct.

So some examples might be a client wants to reduce cost, a builder may propose a substitution, an evaded architect may become contractually responsible to a contractor.

A program may demand documents before the architects believe they are sufficiently resolved. These arrangements change commercial relationships, but they do not remove the professional obligations attached to that role.

A fire isolated stare on a drawing may appear as a series of lines, but those lines represent an architectural element, a regulatory requirement, and part of the documentation work.

It also represents a contractual obligation and a means for protecting occupants. If a client asks the architect to accept a non-compliant fire safety arrangement to avoid delay, the architect cannot turn that instruction into professional endorsement.

The architect is obligated to explain the problem, refuse the misrepresented design and they may have to withdraw their services if it cannot be resolved.

So what we are suggesting is that drawers and specifications may form part of the construction contract that communicate to the builder what's agreed to be built, but the architect ultimately serves the public and not just the paying client.

They have an obligation to the integrity of that work and the peop and to the people who are affected by it and the professional representations that are made through it.

So very briefly, I'll go through the divided line next week. But I wanted to say that in terms of the Act, last year in 2025 and 2024, there were proposals to repeal the New South Wales Architects Act and move its position provisions into a broad building legislation.

And this is just um the Adam Haddow, who was um New South Wales uh president, he described both the possible administrative logic and the risk.

Consolidation by simplify legislation and acknowledge that architecture sits within a wide construction system. But he suggested that just moving it over was going to be too.

And the important issue is not whether the words remain in a standalone act, it's whether the mechanisms and the public purpose remain coherent, visible and enforceable. Legislation evolves through participation and if architects at institutions do not provide evidence or articulate why regulation matters, you can see why external parties might consolidate it.

They might make it really simple and say architects are not the same as goodness, and that might tip the balance towards reduced obligation and private building yes. And so the question is not should the act be retained as a separate document, it is for you guys, what institutional structure is required to keep professional authority connected to public accountability.

And is this happening adequately through the institutes? Is a lot of this being picked up by other membered-bas organizations.

And we go back to Reba when we say that a learning profession advancing the collective actively doing research and progressing their profession is what a stable and evolving profession should look like.

And if those structures are not talking to one another, it does hint at a different way that the profession should be functioning.

And those gaps are the things that you guys should be thinking about in your diagrams. Okay, so we're now going to um have a break while I get um I set up.

So talk amongst yourselves for a moment and I'll introduce the guests here. Thank you for professional. We've also got Yona Yoni, who's the ARBB's deputy registrar and manager of registration.

She works directly with the processes through which architecture graduates and practitioners enter and maintain registration. So she shows the important perspective on the transition from architecture education into regulated professional practice.

And we've got D Dario'Souza, who's the director of Dart Legal Entry, and has worked closely with the AIBB on major research into systemic risk and compliance culture.

In the architecture sector. And she led the fieldwork and preparation of the ARBB's recent compliant culture report, which examined how architects understand and exercise their professional duties in practice.

So, this is really relevant to professional practice and our lecture series because we are examining architecture not as a collection of technical competences, which is required for our professional practice program, but as a regulated profession operating through legislation, institutions, ethical duties, and obligations to the public.

And today is an opportunity to hear directly from those responsible for administering and examining the regulatory framework, how that registration operates, and what the Architect Act asks of architects where risks and misunderstandings arise in the profession and what professional responsibility means beyond simply complying with the minimum requirements.

So Glennus, Daryl and Fiona, thank you for your time and contributing your experience to the students' understanding. We're very happy to have you here. And I'll be able to do some more. Helen. We're really pleased to be here today and have the opportunity to present to you.

We would like to thank Helen and also Peter Brew for inviting us. Helen's already introduced Fiona and Darren who will be doing presentations today. Now Fiona will be presenting first about registration and the architectural practice examination.

She'll be presenting a presentation that we provide to each of the five Victorian universities that offered accredited courses of study in architecture.

We find that as students get draw closer to the end of their course, they keep to understand more about the regulation of architects requirements for registration.

And they often have questions about the APE and how best to approach it. Daniel will then provide an overview of our compliance culture research. Yeah, and we uh this report highlights the critical role of compliance culture within the architecture profession, why it matters, what it looks like in practice and how it's a template.

This report reinforces the methods of overarching duties and culture that defined professionalism among architecture and are real expand on that We're going to leave to the end for uh questions.

Now before it begins, I would like to acknowledge the traditional owners of the lands on which we are meeting today we will run through the people of the pool of the nation and pay my respects to their dollars past and present.

Thank you. I'll hand over to the Let me know if you can't hear me and I will speak up yeah all good okay great all right um so uh today we're finally going through uh a little bit of an overview of who the ARBB is um and what our role is.

I'm going to cover off professional obligations for architects and a little bit about the disciplinary process for those who are registered or practitioners.

I'm going to provide you with a bit of background on the pre-registration requirements and the registration process and I'll also go over the architectural practice examination, the APA.

And as Linda said then we'll have some time for questions at the end, but also feel free to ask me questions throughout if you have a burden question as we're going through this. Happy to take questions as I go.

Right. So um regulations for architects was first introduced in 1922 when we first act regulated architects was established.

So the primary rationale for the instruction of regulation at the time was to protect the public interest by ensuring that buildings were designed by appropriately qualified and exper serieniocedus people.

This rationale has endured and remains at the heart of the current regulatory regime. So today AOPV is established under the Architects Act 1991 and ARBB operates as a statutory authority.

So the Act also sets up regulations. There is a recent change I saw before we had the 2020 the 2015 sorry regulations up.

So we've now moved to the twenty twenty-six regulations. Um and the rate the regulations that are rate obligations um uh that follow on from the act um but I'll go through this in a little bit more detail.

So there is a version of us in every state and territory, so registration is required nationally, and each version of us does the same thing, which is regulate the profession.

So we're required to be registered in each jurisdiction and we'll have a similar obligation in each jurisdiction that you need to follow. So the AOB's overarching purpose is to protect community interests and still confidence in regulation, integrity and delivery of architectural services in Victoria.

So the AMB regulates architects and orders of the Architects Act, and the main purpose of the Act is to provide for the registration of architects, approval of companies and partnerships, to regulate the professional conduct of architects, to provide a procedure for handling complaints against architects and to regulate the terms architect, architectural services, and architectural design.

With the support of the Architects Creditation Council of Australia, the double ACA, we also accredit architectural qualifications such as this one that you're in at the moment.

And we also provide and work together to provide the national standard competency for architects. So one of the ways in which the A to D instills confidence in the architectural profession and architects is through the complaint and investigation function.

So the Act enables the M and D to investigate matters on its own initiative or on the complaint of any person. There are two main areas that we would look into, one being professional conduct which is against registered entities, so people who are registered with ARBD and the other is prohibitive conduct and prohibitive conduct is for individuals who are not registered and it operating in breach of the act.

So the architects code professional practice is contained within the architects regulations 2026. That's known as the code and that sets out key obligations that architects must follow.

I'm going to go through just quickly what those obligations are at a higher level. So architects must act in accordance with the law, act in public interest, act with honesty, integrity and openness, perform confidently and with the required level of care, expertise and experience.

Be open and transparent about fees and costs, provide services diligently and properly, communicate with clients effectively and promptly, administer building contracts impartially and diligently, maintain confidentiality, manage conflicts of interest, disclose referrals, recommendations and endorsements, maintain adequate systems and resources, ensure that they document and maintain records of all interactions with their clients and provide their clients with a complaints handling process and also cooperate generally with the board.

So if you're interested those obligations that are read at high level are actually in the regulations which are all available online. You probably have a live level in here. So as I mentioned this is a new version of the the code.

So there are a lot of resources available on our website at the moment to sort of do a a comparison between the previous code and the the current code and just a general overview of what are the changes in the regulations.

So that's available on our website under the Architec resources, so feel free to have a look at that. So in respect of professional conduct following an investigation into an architect's professional conduct.

Architects may receive written advice on compliance from the board. That's a more sort of minor response to a breach against the code.

Or they might be referred to the architects tribunal, which is an independent body to the ARBB for disciplinary proceedings. Some of the outcomes of a disciplinary proceeding in the architects tribunal can include fines, requirements to undertake further education, suspension of registration or ultimately cancellation of registration.

Prohibitive conduct on the other hand relates to offences committed in breach of the Architects Act. This means generally that a person or body cannot represent themselves or allow themselves to be represented as an architect unless registered or approved under the Architects Act.

So to do to represent yourself is a breach in the Act and that can result in enforcement proceedings being taken against you to ultimately wind up in the magistrate court.

So those are sort of some things to consider. Um I'm just going to jump ahead. Um you can have a look at our uh discipline register and our website to sort of get an idea of some of more recent is the programme matters as well.

But I'm going to jump to finance of registration. So another sort of large responsibility of ARBB is to register architects and architectural practices.

So this might be a few years off for some of you. It's important to sort of start understanding what you're working towards. So there are five key requirements for registration.

The first is that a person is a fit and proper person. So this is a test that is checking what you refer to as probity matters, and these are things that relate to you having a criminal history, criminal convictions, having any insolvencies or bankruptcies.

Um some people get confused because of the the wording used but fit prof person doesn't generally have uh much to do with your your personal health or or fitness um in that respect, it's to do with your criminal history.

So if you hold a criminal record or have anything like that previously, you must disclose that at the point of registration. It's always better to disclose as well.

Keep that in mind. Doesn't mean that you're going to be automatically not eligible for registration. The second element is that you've passed a prescribed course of study.

So typically this will be an Australian course of study. You're currently here enrolled in this course, so that is a prescribed course of study, it's an accredited degree, so you're already meeting that requirement.

Obviously, typically the relevant degree is the Master of Architecture, but we obviously do accept people who are registered for overseas or have a qualification from overseas as well, but there are additional steps to meet that requirement.

Thirdly, a person must have engaged in two or more years of practical architectural work and can demonstrate to the AB that they have a standard professional practice that we would find to be satisfactory.

This is also achieved through meeting one of the pathways to registration. So we'll go through in a little bit in detail about the AP, the architectural practice examination, because that would be the one that would be relevant to all of you.

So we'll go through that in a bit more detail later. The fourth and big um requirements for registration are to be covered by professional debt insurance and obviously to pay any relevant fees.

So So as I stated the Architects Act provides regulatory tools for the ARBB to control participation in the profession, for regulating the terms, architect, architectural services, architectural design services and architectural design.

Phrases and titles cannot be used without registration. So you even need to be personal if you're currently working in an architectural firm in terms of if you're all this technical graduate or anything like that, that can still be considered a breach.

So um the A to B registers natural persons, that just means human beings, as well as legal entities. But for natural persons, there are only two classes of registration, and that is the practicing class and the non-practicing class.

So when registering for the first time, you can only go into the practicing class of registration, which obviously means that you're able to provide architectural services.

At any time once you're registered, you can move into the non-practicing class. The non-practicing class is just there for people who are no longer providing architectural services either for a long period of time or just a leave of absence.

But essentially, when you're non-practicing you cannot provide architectural services, but we'd recommend that you say something like an architect non-practicing. So um it's important to note that architects have important continuing obligations under both the Act and the regulations.

So once you're registered that's not it. You still have things that you have to do on an ongoing basis. That includes obviously paying relevant fees, really providing proof of insurance to us, and then as well as your continuing professional development or CPD.

AWB also can sometimes try and issue guidelines. They are also relevant and something that you should be across if there's any guidance that we've issued that would be relevant to you um to look at being there in your professional practice.

So um there are three main pathways to registration. I'll go over the other two quite quickly because they're probably not relevant to both of you.

So the first and most common pathway is the architectural practice examination. So I'm going to spend a bit more time on that in the next few slides. The second pathway is the experience practitioner assessment or the EPA?

And this is a competency-based assessment, it's sort of like portfolio work. It's on the basis of complex projects, and it's actually quite hard to sort of meet the minimum requirements to do that pathway.

So usually it's for people who have been registered overseas that then coming to Australia or potentially have been working for sort of decades and seeking registration after the fact.

This is probably a more complex pathway to meet. There are There is more information on the ACA website if you are interested. And the final pathway is mutual recognition, which holds our equivalent registration.

So as I mentioned earlier, there's a version of us in each jurisdiction. So you need to be registered in each jurisdiction. So to avoid having to meet all the requirements that I sort of went through before for um professional practical practical experience sorry um mutual recognition allows you to bypass that and just meet the other requirements about being a bit of a person and things of that nature.

So the AP or the architecture practice examination. As I mentioned, it's probably the most common pathway that you're going to go down. So the AP is administered by the ACA on behalf of the state and territory boards.

It's conducted in this way so we can have a nationally consistent assessment which will allow individuals to move state to state as required. So you'll all be at the same sort of educational standard to then get registered in any state or territory.

Once you've completed all three parts of the APE, then you're eligible for registration, so you're needing that sort of second requirement for the practical experience.

It's important that you start familiarising yourself now because you can use your pre-graduation hours for CAP. So you can use up to 12 months of that blog in your logbook.

So I would recommend having a look at the ACO website. You can go to our website, we have a link through to the relevant section from there as well if that's easier. And just have a look at the AP handbook for candidates.

There's a lot of detailed information in there about what is eligible work and what isn't. So just familiarise yourself with that now. There are other resources available as well at both our website and on the double ACA website on that phone.

So I'm just going to go through these slides relatively quickly because potentially you're this or this, I hope you are. So this is the national standard of competency for architects, the competency profiles.

So where you are at the moment, what you're aiming to achieve is that sort of left column. So when you complete your degree, that's what you'll be, that's your sort of benchmark as a graduate of architecture.

When you go to do the APA, you'll be moving into that middle red column so that you'll need to meet the performance criteria at that level. So it's a shift from having knowledge of something to having more of an understanding and a practical application of it.

So um probably best as well to get yourself familiar with um the explanatory notes that are available on the double A website. So go through a little bit more detail about the performance criteria at the different levels and how you would achieve that with examples at the different levels.

So that'll give you a better idea or putting together your statement practice if you're local with the APE to understand what level of experience you need.

For the um I'll just show you that slide there. It looks like in a little bit more detail. You're at the grey at the moment, then you move into the red. And then post registration is the blue, which is basically you need to be able to do everything across all of those NSC profiles at a higher level.

So again, the NSEA and the explanatory notes are available on the ACA website with links from our website. With the performance criteria, not the entirety of the NSEA is relevant for the APE.

35 of the performance criteria are relevant. And I think I've got them listed on the next slide. Um yeah. So those are the criteria that are relevant in PPAPE.

You'll be able to find the details of this as well in the AP panels as well. So this's going won to be where the way that you can see the this, it's in next one of that document.

So part one of the AP is the logbook and the statement of practical experience. There are specific documents that you need to submit for part one, and again, this is all an eligibility assessment.

So you obviously need to submit your logbook which will contain all of your relevant experience to each the 3,300 hours, which is a mandatory requirement for the APE.

And then you'll also have your state of practical theories or otherwise immediately as well. And within your SOAP you'll have some C B and a criteria report.

Some of the other requirements that you need to, you know, documents that you need to submit with the ADE is a statutory decoration and a copy of your architectural qualification.

In Victoria we request that that's a transcript, so keep that in mind, because sometimes it can take some time to request your transcript. So you need to make sure that all of these documents are submitted when you apply for the APE.

If you're found ineligible, that's generally either you haven't submitted the documents or you've not met one of the requirements in handbook. So that's why I suggest you get familiar with that now so you'll across what those requirements are.

So as I mentioned, you need to meet the 3,300 minimum hours. And that's across the performance criteria in the NSCA, but the ones that are relevant to the APE.

So those 35 performance criteria I mentioned, those are the ones you need to focus on I mentioned earlier you can start logging your hours now before you graduate.

So um it's a sort of maximum of 12 months, which equates to 1,650 hours that you can log up to.

And if you have experience from overseas, you can also log the same overseas experience one thousand six hundred and fifty but you do need to have at least twelve months within Australia post graduation experience so you'll have to have that as sort of a minimum if you use hours from overseas or post-graduation hours.

So the um the, I'll go through a bit of the soap now um in a bit more detail. So you're required to do to provide about two to three thousand word statement and that will generally be across most people do about four projects in their SOAP, but there's no limit on projects for what you would include in the SOAP within the statement and what doesn't sort of count as the towards the word count is the summary C V, and then the PC report.

So those are sort of additional requirements outside of that two to three thousand words. So your summary C V should focus on showcasing your experience in terms of the architectural experience that you've got.

Try to avoid mentioning other jobs that are not relevant to your architectural experience, purpose, hobbies, things like that, you've got a limited amount of space, put in information.

Try and focus it in on what's relevant. For the project detail page, this can be over multiple pages. There's a lot of requirements around what you need to have in here and what you need to include in terms of detail.

So you will need to outline what your role is the in project. So if you were just observing something, you can still use that as experience to meet the performance criteria, but you have to be very specific that you were at the observable thing.

There's a lot of information as well about verifying the chip, which I won't go in on time, but there's a lot of information on pages 17 and 18 of the handbook about that.

If anybody has any questions, I'm happy to answer them. But there's a lot of requirements around verification signatures as well as references on those pages that I mentioned.

So as I mentioned, part one is to determine eligibility to then go forward into part two. So essentially, what we're looking for is that do you meet all of those requirements as they're listed in the handle?

Not necessarily assessing what you put in there, but we're making sure that you've met the minimum requirements. So it's very important that you put that together and very closely follow the APA handle.

So part two of the APE is the um national examination paper, the NEP. This is a long and it's AE questions, they're scenario based, um multiple choice questions.

So there's an example of this in the APA handbook. I think it's in lecture two, maybe three, of the APA handbook.

So have a look at that if you want to see an example of what the questions and the scenarios will be like. It is quotes book, so you can't have any notes with you. Generally it's going to cover off on the National Construction Code.

Um, because it's a national exam, it'll be something that's um broad enough to cover all the jurisdictions. So you don't need to memorize the NCC but you need to have a rough idea on you know specific uh relevant areas to architects.

And part three is the examination by interview. So a good tip here is that everything that you're submitting in part one will come for the beatings in part three.

So when you're putting together your logbook and your statement of practice experience it should be focused on what the examiners will be looking at in part three.

So part three is not going to be a discussion about your skills and your experience. They're going to be probing your experience to sort of work out where the gaps in your knowledge are and what the limits to your knowledge are.

So they might use a hypothetical or they might use a direct example from your book or your statement, use your project and say, what if this happened? What if that happened?

So I think my sort of best tip for you is when you're putting together your soap and even the logo, don't look for the fun projects or project that you think is the coolest because they don't really care to be blunt.

You need to show something that cover up a lot of performance criteria and demonstrate your experience in a broad banner across a lot of different sort of project types.

So that's what you should be focusing on when you're putting together your your soap and your logbook. Now obviously once you've completed part three and you've passed that, that doesn't mean that you're now registered, but you still then need to apply for registration and meet those that five criteria that I went through earlier.

So yeah, it as I said, they're not just testing what you know is what you're just a discussion generally around your the skills of knowledge, they'll be very targeted.

So I think that's me done. I'll throw it over to Daryl now. Hello everyone. Um so as uh Glenis mentioned my job today is to share with you some research that was relatively recently undertaken by the ARBB about compliance culture and I explain why this is important for you to pay attention to.

So just some background as to why the ARBV did undertook this research. Basically the ARBV did their own sort of preliminary research.

You can see there in 2022 and 2024 to really interrogate what's happening in the architecture sector. And what they found in those reports are certain systemic risks that exist across the sector.

By systemic risks I mean risks that apply across the whole system, not just due to conduct by architects, but the broader participants within the building and construction sector.

And you can go and have a read of those reports. But in addition to the research that was done by the ARBB and the New South Wales equivalent, there have also been some other seminal reports that indicate that there is both scope for improvement in relation to the attitude and approach of architects to compliance.

And this comes from cladding safety Victoria reports that were published in 2024, as well as the seminal Shergold We Building Confidence Report, which was published in 2018, no doubt you've already heard about.

And basically, in light of this evidence indicating that there's scope for improvement in relation to the architects' approach to compliance, the ARBD decided that in order to drive lasting change in relation to architects' attitude towards compliance, it's really important to focus on culture.

That is the attitudes, the values, the assumptions, the aspirations that architects have when it comes to compliance so that rather than just focusing on individual instances of noncompliance, the type of non compliance that Fiona was talking about, it's about the attitude towards compliance in the first instance that can try to preempt and prevent noncompliance from occurring in the first place.

So really looking at how to address the root causes of noncompliance before noncompliance occurs. And this actually this focus on compliance culture was recommended by uh Commissioner Hayne from the Financial Services Royal Commission, which you may have heard about.

It was published in 2019, a very important Royal Commission that it looked at the financial services sector, and what Commissioner Haynes said is that regulators typically focus on instances of non-compliance when they arise rather than looking at cultural issues.

And this is really important. Taking a step back from those individual instances and trying to drive positive compliance culture which can avoid harm for clients, users of architectural services, and the profession more generally.

Now, if you're interested in reading the details of the report after this session, there are three main outputs from the research. The first is a detailed report on strengthening compliance culture in the architecture sector, which contains the ARBB's detailed analysis and findings.

There's a one-page high-level summary for those that just want a snapshot. And finally, probably the most relevant and useful for all of you is a booklet containing practical guidance for architects and architectural firms.

So this is just a short guide which explains the essence of the larger report. It includes case studies as to how, as a sole practitioner, a small form firm, or a large firm, how you can go about building and enhancing a strong compliance culture.

And it also contains a list of top ten strategies that you can undertake as a sole practitioner, small firm or large firm, to really enhance the compliance culture.

Now, before we get into the details of the compliance culture report, I just want to share some sort of key concepts that underpin this research. The first is what is compliance culture?

Now every group has a culture. Within this room there is a culture and even within your friendship groups or your uh cafe work cul uh there is a culture.

And so what we mean by compliance culture is the combination of the shared values, attitudes and habits that guide behaviour, actions, and decisions.

So compliance culture is what is the approach within an organization towards compliance? The second key concept is why does compliance culture matter?

Some of you may be sitting in a room saying compliance, that's not for me, that's for a lawyer. I'm an architect. Well, a strong compliance culture is really important for all of you.

And the reasons are threefold. The first is it can reduce compliance risk. So we only talked about the action that the regulator can take if there has been breach of the code.

And of course, if you have a strong compliance culture, you're less likely to come up against the ARBB in a compliance context. But it can also help you have a strong and positive relationship with your clients because the more compliant you are, the more likely it is that you will have a positive and constructive relationship with your client.

And I'll explain what the correlation between compliance and client outcomes are later. And more generally, a strong compliance culture can enhance trust and confidence in the profession.

And you do have duties to the profession, not just to your clients, as I will explain later. Having a compliance, a strong compliance culture can also set a positive example for the broader building and construction sector because it's not just you as architects or suitable architects that drive positive outcomes in the sector, it's all the other participants as well, and architects can really lead by example.

Now, what does a strong compliance culture look like in practice? Well, if you look around the members of the organisation where this culture exists and see a shared understanding and agreement about why compliance culture is important or why compliance is important, that's effectively what a strong compliance culture looks like.

Is there a commitment to compliance or is there not a commitment to compliance? And how can compliance culture be strengthened if all of those within this group embrace their overarching duties and really commit to compliance, this can really develop and embed and sustain a strong compliance culture.

Now as I mentioned a culture is the accumulation of values, attitudes, habits, and aspirations that shape the way that you behave on a day-to-day basis, the way you make decisions, the way you interact with your clients, the strategies that you adopt, all those business as usual activities, the culture around you helps to decide how you implement those actions in practice.

Now a culture, a compliance culture, which relates to how these aspects apply to your attitude towards compliance can affect your mindset.

And a compliance mindset exists when an individual is committed to understanding and applying their compliance obligations, making decisions lawfully, taking actions that are lawful and ethical and act with integrity and generally doing the right thing even in when they're not being watched.

And we can see this virtuous cycle that a strong compliance culture can set up by driving individuals compliance mindset and a strong compliance mindset can in turn help to sustain a strong compliance culture within the organisation.

Now if there is a strong compliance culture, as I mentioned, this can help ensure that individuals within an organization have a strong compliance mindset, and in turn, this helps to produce compliant behaviour.

So, how can we recognise whether a strong compliance mindset exists? First of all, a commitment to learning. So there, as Fiona explained to you, there's a lot to learn when you're an architect, and someone who has a strong compliance mindset will be committed to learning, not just at a moment in time but on an ongoing basis.

A compliance mindset exists when there's a thorough understanding of your obligations, not just a superficial understanding of what you need to know, but really a deep understanding of what your compliance obligations are.

An acceptance of responsibility, not just assuming that the firm or the people that you're working with are going to take care of the compliance issues, but you, as an architect, once you're subject to the code, accept responsibility for compliance yourself.

A vigilant approach in your daily task when you're interacting with your clients, when you're undertaking projects, when you're doing your work, being vigilant as to what your compliance obligations are and ensuring that those compliance obligations are discharged.

And finally, a commitment to a compliant pathway even when obstacles arise that may deter you or deviate you from that compliant pathway.

And there may be temptations that exist along the way to be non-compliant, but someone who has a strong compliance mindset is someone who commits to a compliant pathway even when those obstacles exist.

Now you can't talk about a comp about a strong compliance culture without talking about architects as professionals because the two things are tightly intertwined.

Now, architects' compliance obligations stem from their status as professionals. Like doctors, like lawyers, like other types of professionals, architects have skilled and a lot of expertise in a very specialised area.

And in that capacity as a professional, architects are entrusted with responsibilities that really can affect a wide range of important societal values, including safety, including harm, including environmental sustainability including cultural heritage and identity, social equality and inclusion as well as economic efficiency.

The buildings that you design can affect all of these things. And in exchange for this very important professional status that you have, as I'll explain, there is an expectation that you discharge your duties as a professional as well.

Now what are the defining attributes of an architect as a professional? As I mentioned, you will have specialised knowledge and expertise that distinguishes you from everybody else.

You provide important services for the benefit of others. You the the eight services that you provide involve collaboration with other participants in the building and construction sector and often involves the complex exercise of discretion and judgment.

And in exchange for this specialized knowledge, which puts you at a sort of a higher status compared to others that don't have this knowledge and expertise, there is an expectation that you will maintain high standards and that you will comply with your legal and ethical obligations.

And generally speaking, a professional mindset and appreciation of your professional status naturally aligns with a proactive and committed approach to compliance.

Now underpinning your professional status are certain overarching duties and these are embedded and codifies in the architect's code of professional conduct which uh be ran through shortly before.

So I'm not gonna go into the details. Uh the code is up on the website so you can go and have a look and read about the details of those overarching duties. But I'm going to just touch on the sort of legal and ethical foundation of these overarching duties and just briefly identify them.

So, as I mentioned, you are professionals as an architect, and in exchange for this privileged and important position in society, there is a social contract between architects as a professional and society.

In exchange for this position, society expects you to comply with these overarching duties. And this social contract is basically codified in the Architects Act, in the Architects Regs 2026 and the Code of Professional Conduct.

And the common law, which is made by judges when there is a case before them, basically, elaborates these overarching duties and explains them in more detail.

So what are these overarching duties? These are reflected in the code of professional conduct. In summary, there is a duty to take care.

When you are doing architectural work, you need to do it diligently and with due care to ensure that you meet those minimum standards. You need to be competent, you need to be skilled, you need to educate yourself, not just at a moment in time but on an ongoing basis, including through CPD that the ARBB offers.

You need to act with honesty and integrity. So you need to avoid misleading information, for example, when you're publishing or publicising your expertise, make sure that you act with honesty and integrity in doing so.

You need to comply with all applicable laws. That's not just the Architects Act and the REGs and the Code. There's also the National Construction Code which the owner mentioned.

But there are a plethora of other laws that you need to be aware of when you are running an architectural practice. There's the duty of confidentiality when clients provide you with information to keep that information confidential and protected.

You need to act impartially and avoid conflicts of interest. For example, if you are offered a benefit that may affect the way in which you provide services to your client.

You need to be aware of conflicts of interest and avoid them if possible, and there are certain rules around that in the code. And you need to keep records and communicate effectively.

This is really a strong and important basis of a well-functioning uh relationship with your clients. Now, I I won't go into too much detail, but you need to be aware that these overarching duties play out differently when you're interacting with your clients.

The duties as they're owed to the public as well as to the border profession, because you have duties to all of these groups, to clients to, the public and to the profession. The ARBB has actually run webinars on these overarching duties and the different application of those duties to these three groups, and you can go to the ARBB's website to listen to those webinars for more detail.

You also need to be aware that these overarching duties are played differently at different levels. You as an individual have duties for example to keep yourself educated, but the firms within which you operate also have duties to ensure that they provide you with CPD opportunities, that you have resources to ensure that you act compliantly, and at the project level you'll interact with other participants.

Those duties apply differently in that context. And finally sectoral bodies such as the AIA and the ACA, other industry bodies also help need to help you discharge those overarching duties.

Now, why are we worrying about compliance culture? As I mentioned, there's a causal link between the culture within an organization and compliant mindset and finally compliant outcomes.

And this diagram, which it uses a ripple effect metaphor. So a ripple effect basically describes how a single action or event can create a sort of a cascade of comp uh consequences like a drop in the ocean or in a lake.

And so five minutes very very quickly, a strong professional identity can help to empow encerourage architects to embrace their overarching duties, embed a strong compliance culture and thereby deliver positive outcomes to their clients, to users of architectural services and the profession more generally.

We're running out of time, but again the guidance document that I mentioned to you earlier identifies the top 10 strategies that you as a saltition or a small firm can undertake to develop a strong compliance culture or enhance your compliance culture and a similar list of strategies for large firms.

Now I might just the concluding remarks we can pick up in the Q<unk>A, but we might just uh in their um speak simply Don't more touch.

So I was just gonna ask some of so to translate this to what's applicable to the student. We've been doing this professional practice course for the last seven years and it's really on the almost every slide I think it's showing down now aligns it aligns to our lecture series because ten um what would be good to hear ten years ago this compliance culture was obviously not didn't exist.

You know you can see that when you describe um the reports that you refer to, talking about professionalism and talking about a professional duty of care was not was definitely not was not taught that way in our school and I still don't see that being taught in other schools.

So it sounds really obvious when as a regulator to be saying, well, architects are professionals, we should have a duty of care. And I think with a law background and a regulation background, most architects will put their client as and themselves as the people that they are practicing for.

And so it would be good to hear from perhaps looking towards what people are doing. When you provide these CPDs, what do practitioners say?

And what kind of questions do you get about how to shift this culture? The culture is about innovation and excellence in the architectural built environment as objects and as designed um artistic expressions.

It is not you know, the client is viewed as a facilitator of that. And regulation is seen as something that is required, not because it's something that people want to do.

Perhaps yeah. Um yeah, it's really important uh question and uh a very sort of insightful observation. Um I think it's important to recognise and and really take stock of what regulation is about.

It may be perceived as burdensome and something extra that you need to do when you're providing architectural services. You you guys are design experts and and you're focused on the products, the architectural services that you're providing.

The regulatory framework is basically uh as you you're talking about facilitators it's trying to drive you towards that excellence it's not intended to be a burden and those duties that are enshrined in the code are there as the basic building blocks to drive you towards excellent outcomes.

So it's important to understand what is the rationale for uh regulation. Now often regulators get caught up in the day-to-day cases that cross their desk and it's much harder to focus on culture because cultures are much more intangible thing.

There may be an instance of non-compliance that comes in and you can recognise that it's not compliant, but how do you assess whether culture is not a strong you know strongly in favour of compliance.

It's much more difficult. So the reason why there may not have been this emphasis on culture is because it's a big undertaking to look at culture rather than focusing on instances of non-compliance.

Now ARBD in my view, I've worked with lots of regulators over many years, is exceptional in that sort of proactive focus on the bigger picture.

It's it's very hard for regulators as well to step away from those individual instances of noncompliance and say, okay, what's the biggest picture? Where are the systemic risks?

How do we identify the root causes and and address them proactively so that we stop these non-compliances department. So the fact that you may not have recognised it or seen it is because it's not typical for regulators.

It was recognized in the Financial Services Royal Commission by Commissioner Hayne, and he himself said regulators typically focus on these individual instances of non-compliance, but regulators need to s take a step back and and look at at culture.

Glennus, I was going to ask, speaking from outside the architecture profession, have you found these things that uh you know quite similar that my our argument is you can't have an architectural profession if the public doesn't trust you.

People will turn away from architects to you know provide professional services if they're not trusting. And so with your experience in other professions, uh you know, this regulation, the importance of regulation, what have you are there any crossovers to other professions you've just talked about in employees and doctors, but anything that you feel has come over, you know, people have experienced as Daryl said, the um you know it is about trusting audience and I think in every sorry, in every profession um as you said I've been involved in regulating profession and I mean that they have a very um strong connection to almost most people have a connection.

So they deal with a very widely And also in the wide range of products, I think as our teachers do as well. Regional, small practice, large practice, there's sort of a lot of similarities, but I would say from my experience that having a strong professional mindset actually fits you well for the challenges in your professional role, whether that's as a lawyer, doctor, architect, um and it actually helps protect you as a professional because um I think as Daryl and Piri have mentioned, the code and the requirements um will um stand you instead if you follow them if you do end up in litigation or some comp in a more sort of um to owner situation than just basically regulators, so I think that she might see the requirement.

Can I just add Helen? Um the the market for design services as you would know is extremely competitive and um having a strong compliance culture can really help architects distinguish themselves from other um design professionals that are not ex held to the same standards.

It'd be great to keep talking about if we feel like we have to finish. Next time we might allow a bit more time for you guys. But thank you very much for coming in. I think that's a good way to end Yeah.

I I I'm I'm not with that much, but yeah, this is my overall idea but everyone gonna have different