Swiss year plus up. Swiss you plus. Background. And this disentangles it from the everyday realities, so we can understand the origin and the potential solution to problems.

We've borrowed from researchers into professional identity, that knowledge increase, democratization, and globalization are impacting the profession and there are other problems such as prestige, corporatism, paternalism, status and power that afflict all professions.

And these are the core ideas that come out of those three readings that you guys should have been looking at um between each of these lectures. And then last week we spoke about research into the origin and history of the Architects Act and Institutes, and we showed the events that led to its formation.

And the continual need for the profession to operate as a public and collective discipline rather than only as commercial service, which can be achieved through research that converts the specialized knowledge that our profession has to collective responsibility and public benefit.

And the ARBV, particularly Darius, who comes from a law background, really reiterated those ideas through her compliance culture um presentation.

So I'll begin this lecture. So these are some of the ideas we're going to cover. We're putting the bad architect and his origin um the name and the concept from Adolf Lowe's.

Thinking about similarities rather than differences, this continues that idea about the architect being a collective rather than an individual, and perhaps the term architect being a persona for everyone.

What specialisation and awards mean? And what does that mean for um is it helping the profession? Is it helping the business of the profession?

Is it helping advance um innovation ideas and collective um movement. Our relations and some comments about research efforts, the future of the profession.

So the title of this talk comes from an essay written by Adolf Lewis in nineteen ten. As an architect practicing in Vienna at the turn of the last century, he wrote numerous essays on the theme of architects' perceived value compared to the actual value they create.

And he was deeply interested in debates surrounding professionalisation and training of architects. So the quote here talks about may I take you to the shores of a mountain lake. In this case it's Lake Como.

And the sky is blue, the water green and everywhere sap everywhere is profound tranquility. The clouds and mountains are mirrored in the lake, the houses, farms and chapels as well. They do not look as if they are fashioned by man, it is as if they came straight from God's workshop, like the mountains and trees, clouds and blue skies, and everything exudes an air of beauty and peace.

He goes on to say But what is this? A discordant note in the tranquility, an unnecessary screech, because among the local houses that were not built by them but by God stands a villa.

The creation of another architect, a city architect, one that's come from a probably Vienna, um and they he describes the creation of an architect, whether a good or bad architect, I don't know.

All I know is that the tranquility, peace and beauty have vanished and before God there are no god or bad architects, and in his presence all architects are equal.

In the cities, in the presence of Bili Bilial or gone. There are subtle nuances, as is the nature of vice, and therefore I ask, why is it that any architect, good or bad, desecrates a lake?

We take this extract because he compares things that are natural on the lake, such as village houses, trains and peddle steamers, and by extension the engineers and architects who design them.

But he also compares it to the architects who have come and designed things that are about status that don't belong on the lake, or people who don't live on the lake, the people who don't build them, the people who don't maintain them.

And so his distinction is: all architects are causing harm. So what is this distinction between good or bad? And we'd like to unsettle this idea through this lecture.

We might say people assume the former or good architects are artists and the latter are non architects. But a building in good taste should be just as much a matter of course as not putting a knife in your mouth or cleaning your teeth in the morning.

I.e. all buildings should be good design good conceptually. People are here confusing art and culture. So we may say that um the bespoke, the individual, the acquired taste, the artist is what we aspire to.

And that some of these other ideas perhaps are not in the foreground or the forefront of mind for architects. I might skip forward and maybe that's like Sorry, I've got a slide that's disappeared, so just give me one moment..

Um so while architects may see differences between figures like Frank Lloyd Wright and Lewis Allian, or ARM from Lyons and Peter Corrig and and in this case from Godzilla for Design Hub and ARM for Story Hall, both argues that in the eyes of God we are all tainted by the same brush, we share the same guilt as we affect the lake in the same way, transforming, destroying its beauty, ultimately spoiling nature.

And this suggests that despite our belief in our competitive individual differences, we are actually all the same. Lowe's also points out the mistake of distinguishing between good and bad architects.

Because it isn't between the good and bad architect but a matter of degrees, in reality we are all guilty of sin. So not to say that any of the designs of these buildings are good or bad, but we are simply saying what is different between them all and what is fundamentally the same?

And what are they in pursuit of and what do they neglect? And some of the examples we give are the institute architect categories. Are these different architectures or are they different business models and marketing strategies?

So I'll go back to this one. We have argued that the registration of an architect in Victoria and Australia signifies that a license has been granted, meaning that certain minimum standards have been met, and this requires a regulatory framework to establish the standards.

If all practitioners meet these required standards for professional registration, can the distinction between good and bad truly exist? Is this a harmful dichotomy? Are we pursuing differences in competition with one another and failing to balance some of the other obligations that we have.

So the problem with competition, differentiation and specialization is particularly clear in the Australian Institute of Architecture Work as an example.

With categories such as commercial, educ,ational, public residential, urban design and heritage. And whilst awards are a form of exemplar, which we spoke about in the first week, it recognises projects to be photographed, written about in books and presented in lectures, shared with students in design studio, used by other architects and profession as case studies, there are problems with this differentiation, the subsequent judging process and sharing of knowledge.

Who have these distinctions been made for? Is it for the benefit of architects or is it for competition with each other? Is it to demonstrate competence to the client?

Are we redefining or narrowing definitions of architecture based on market segmentation. Another example might be if people know about Melbourne Park Tennis Centre, designed by NH Architecture.

Hamish Lyme has in the past talked about it being a TV production studio, a you know where um events are held, where people play sport in one, where people also might watch the filming of um the tennis, where there are concerts, what makes one public space under the category of public architecture and the other a commercial space under the commercial category?

Are these distinctions being debated for ideas or are they being debated for market segmentation? In support of this, a publication titled Judging Architecture, Issues, Divisions, Triumphs, Victorian Architecture Awards, 1929-2003.

This was an exhaustive reassessment of past winners of Victorian Architecture Awards across 70 years. And they assembled a series of people who were experts, historians, very experienced practitioners and they proposed actually a new list of the 36 best buildings of the last seventy five years.

One example, you can see here that they are debating and talking about them retrospectively. At the time, as an example, in 1969, the Southland Shopping Centre by Tompkins, Shaw, and Evans received the Royal Institute of Architects Award.

There's Chester, which surpassed the now iconic National Gallery of Victoria, submitted in the same year. You can see that at the time it was important in the early 60s, to be building these types of retail centres or suburbs we were building.

But you can also see that the economic and historical context in which these awards were granted means that if we retrospectively looked at this it would be very different.

We know that Chapston is subsumed the original design, he cannot see it anymore. We can see that the NGV at the time had higher cultural value and the Southland Shopping Centre represented accumulation of research and development to a new suburban retail time.

And at the time with no categories at both projects were judged on architectural merit in contribution to the profession rather than a distinguishing distinction between types.

So there's sort of two issues there. One is about is there real benefit in categories or is it about market segmentation? And then the benefit of debating what has merit?

Is it about cultural value? Is it about research and development into suburban retail types? And both of them were re-looked at. These examples all point to a problem that all architects have about architecture, that there is good architecture and bad architecture, which focuses on subjective questions of perceived beauty and aesthetics rather than ensuring base competencies and responsibilities and obligations.

It makes our work appear as competing services rather than products, and it blinds us into thinking that the pursuit of aesthetic difference is our key objective to success.

So this is not new. From last week's presentation, um this is an extract from Freelan and his comparison between the Art and Architecture Journal of New South Wales chapter versus the Victorian Institute's Journal.

And you can see one on the left. Um for Victoria it was much more about professional record and organisation.

And on the right in New South Wales, it was much more about public culture, art and architectural discourse.

These journals, the competitions, the institution, factions and prominent personalities of both types helped form a collective architectural culture while also producing individual reputation and regional hierarchy.

Freeland at the time dismissed that the art paper publication was full of Dillon articles and reveals the real dispute should architectural media organise the profession, enlarge public culture, or provide a stage for influential people and tastes, or for critique, or for record keeping.

The historical point is not that rivalry is unavoidable, it's it is that collective institutions have repeatedly allowed professional advancement to be measured through individual standing.

Journals, competitions and awards are therefore not additions to the profession, they are part of the machinery through which it decides who represents it. The contemporary system is much more commercial, much more image driven, but its underlying politics are familiar.

So I give this example, what do the awards ask us to see? Award categories are not neutral systems. They are a professional constitution of value.

They decide in advance what the institute will count as achievement and what it thinks is peripheral. Typology, authorship, visual distinction, and technical accomplishments might be made central, and yet things like social benefit which we can see here working on country, collaboration, maintenance and long-term occupation might remain exceptional, secondary, or invisible.

So as a counter to the institute awards, this is Architecture Award for Social Impact. And you can see that the jury is made up of people outside of architecture.

So the last couple of years you've got um somebody in politics, um somebody who's it um from Black Lash Creative who are indigenous Engagement Consultants.

And you've got Disabilities Discrimination Commissioner from Australian Human Rights Commission. There's also architect, there's also media. But you can see that in the criteria it is to advance the discipline, to empower its users.

The projects are to relate to social cohesion, racial injustice, inclusive housing, salesability, equity, social sustainability, and other areas where difference design can make a difference to society.

Importantly, the award criteria must focus on demonstrable social benefit. So when we pose whether something like this should be a standard across all awards as opposed to this is not its own category.

This is not part of the institute's awards, it's completely separate. It doesn't fit into that ecosystem. I'll go back for a moment. Another example is this matters because the projects that receive architectural awards are not always the projects recognized by external sector bodies.

So just one example: learning environments Australia assess educational facilities through criteria concerned with the effectiveness of planning, design, and construction for learning environments.

Its awards are judged by appointed industry practitioners, not simply by architects rewarding architectural distinction and just discussion. When different systems reward different projects, it is reasonable to ask whether the institute is identifying architecture as public value or principally identifying what architects admire in one another.

So as an example, the fifth or policy talks about having the most outstanding project of the entire field of entries. That's it. You can see here there's planning processes, four criteria, and four criteria under innovation in education.

And what I haven't included here is it's out of the forty point system, they're to take notes, they're to debate and have criteria that's quite strict.

There's also evidence from users, post-occupancy evaluation and learning outcomes. Whereas for the Institute Awards, it's buildings of exceptional merit and the most outstanding project, as defined by the panel.

You can see that the overall winners of that year, 2025, show that the Henry Bastard Award for Educational Architecture what a's professional exemplar that this one we're for people but that is what is asked for um when not they asked for no people but they know what architects are judging so they filter accordingly.

And then we've got the LEA overall winter, which was based on educational impact and post-occupancy evidence. And this is by Hable. So these don't often, they're not often rewarding the same project.

I think this year it was but I wanted to show you that historically it never happened. It was always different. So they're debating different things. In the LEA awards they're talking about educational outcomes through the medium of architecture, and in this case it is the architecture for what it is.

Formal material expression happens to be a school And so the same problem appears for the treatment of indigenous legwork.

So we see here that one article that's being written, that's the wrong caption, this is by Sarah Lee Reeds. Mrs. Mokaku was an alumni from RMIT talks about and he is indigenous.

He talks about being interested in how we can lift the benchmark and hold all practitioners to account across the whole profession. And whether indigenous knowledge systems of value can be embedded within all criteria in all architecture awards.

Instead of, what the institute probably wanted to do at the time was give us an award that was especially categorized for indigenous award. And that would mean that it might be easy to categorize, but it would be difficult to actually make wholesale change across the whole profession.

And I use this one as the example before, where they want to demonstrate social benefit, lived experience, and equity across long term outcomes.

And the idea that this redefines excellence rather than being optional values that are at the periphery of the award system.

Looking back 1985, um Don Bailey at the time identified the central legitimacy problem. The awards program was the Institute's largest attempt to focus public attention on architecture.

And yet Bailey acknowledged that the public often saw it as a self-congratulatory process. Public generally takes a view that they're self-congratulatory, kind of corporate narcissism, where architects are being seen to quantificate what is good architecture without apparent concern for the views of the average person.

Architects publicly pronouncing or good architecture without apparent concern, and within the profession he noted an equally damaging suspicion that awards glorify a vocal minority, perpetuate our architectural fashions, and do little to establish high standards across the whole of practice.

Bayley's warning is the right starting point for this lecture. Awards are defensible only when they educate the public, sharpen collective judgment, and make architecture accountable to the people who permission, use, and live within them.

They become corrosive when they operate as an annual system of professional self-recognition, a means by which architecture tells itself who matters while confusing publicity with public value.

He would like it to never be a vehicle for perpetuating a click of architectural primadones, but rather a mechanism to portray architects as quietly competent facilitators.

He talks about the problem of a system that is designed to glorify the work of a vocal minority of practitioners.

So are the awards recognizing public value or are they recognizing publicity? Coming to 2011, 30 years later, Orihai's review of the 2011 national awards makes Bailey's concerns even more concrete.

Orihai argues that taken together the awards encouraged architecture that was safe, clear, consistent, refined, and delivered within professionalism. The problem is not that these are worthless qualities, the problem is that when they become the dominant measure of excellence, awards celebrate success, they might punish ambition.

The rewards might always reward established practices, familiar building types and projects where risks have already been resolved. Awards therefore do more than record a profession's values.

They train the profession's ambitions. They signal to the public what is important. They teach students, clients, and emerging practices that legitimacy comes through refinement, reliability, recognition in the existing field.

And that perhaps experimentation, collective research or forms of public value that may be difficult to photograph, quantify, or turn into a market identity don't have as much value.

Are the awards turning existing visibility into further professional advantage? Do they perpetuate the things that are already going? And another example from 2024, and in this instance name is a non-architect, but a just a critical writer.

And I'll put this as a link because it's a really great read. She's reflecting on 120 years of architecture in Australia. Architectural publishing is not a neutral record of the profession.

It selects the buildings that become visible, repeatable, teachable, and eventually historical. A photograph, a project description, and a carefully edited set of drawings can make a building appear self evidently resolved, and yet the material conditions of the projects, the fees, procurement, labour, cost, maintenance, defects, occupation, post occupancy performance and community disagreement are usually absent.

Media is very good at showing what architecture is, and perhaps it's much weaker at demonstrating what architecture actually does well or not. So Naomi Stay's reflection on Australian architecture at 120 years old is an acknowledgement that both in magazine's importance as a journal of record also has its blind spots.

She notes the continuing bias against work that is modest, difficult to photograph, or pictorially unsexy and describes the magazine at times as a wall garden, insulated from wider social events.

And this is not a minor editorial weakness. It's a question of what kind of architectural culture is being produced. You'll see here that it makes a career.

It happens once in a career and it becomes written into architectural Australian history. The bias against pictorially unsexy work. There's an entire genre of industrial architecture and other work that is modest, unspectacular, hard to photograph.

And this one is the most pertinent. A often feels like a walled garden, inuud isolated from the events of the nation, especially the wider world. Consider in this time the important events of social history, the Crenella riots, the Apology to the Stolen Generation, the Black Saturday Bushfires, Julie Gillard's election, the introduction to national disability insurance scheme, the release of the Illuminati statement from the heart.

There are some passing references, but overall these events might have occurred in another world outside of architecture, so outside of Australia. Outside of the oddly floating parallel universe that is architecture Australia and perhaps the media publishing landscape.

And she goes on to say that of course AA is not a current affairs journal. It is in the nature of professional magazines to be more of a searchlight than a lantern. And AA's being is strongly directed when it comes to current concerns within the profession.

Should it be a lantern? Is what she is asking. What gets written into history? What does it signal the importance of architectural pursuit?

And as an extension of this, editorials change selection and over time it has gone into platform visibility.

So I want to touch on advertising, I want to touch on bias. And this slide compares different media channels. We've got the awards, which have institutions and juries, which have bias, they professionally recognize excellence, but the prestige might circulate among practices able to enter, document, and promote work itself perpetuating.

Architectural journals have editors, critiques and publishers, and you've heard from Cameron Boone if you'd listened to the lecture. The selecting of projects at times strong photography and architectural arguments about particular ideas.

The criticism and professional promotion become difficult to separate. And yet there should be both. Online design media. The gatekeepers are web traffic, editors and submissions.

And this these are the sorts of things like Art Daily which often has no criticism and its architect statement. Novelty, visual impact and rapid circulation, globally visible, completely detached from local and social contextual issues.

It becomes this glossy what is innovative across the world as opposed to specificity about what's happening in that particular country and why this architecture might deal with those issues there.

I'll show examples later of practice websites and PR. The practice or the publicist is the one who is gatekeeping these ideas. There's a consistent portfolio, there's the brand narrative.

Marketing claims appear without any independent evaluation. And then of course there's Instagram and TikTok which are about algorithm algorithms and audience behaviour.

Images, personality, frequency, novelty, engagement, images. Popularity becomes a proxy for architectural value. And then, of course, LinkedIn.

Professional networks and algorithms, leadership, professional personas, and individual authorities produced through visibility and repetition. So I put this up because advertising doesn't automatically make criticism impossible but it establishes the material conditions under which criticism is attempted.

Independence is not just simply yes or no. Independent from owners, advertisers, suppliers, sponsors, architects who provide access and photography, and the institutions that rely on the same professional networks.

A publication dependent on these relationships is structurally drawn towards access, promotion, and consensus rather than criticism that might disturb them. These pressures did not disappear when architectural media moved online, which Cameron talked about in his um presentation.

Practices might have gained the ability to publish their own work without waiting to be selected by an editor, but this did not remove selection. It just changed what determines visibility. And under this model, professional recognition is no longer produced only through awards and publication.

It's also about posting frequency, visual impact, professional networks, audience engagement and paid promotions. Social media may have widened access to publication, but it does not distribute attention equally.

It creates a different hierarchy for visibility. So can we be critical of this? Can we be more aware of what is being pushed on to public, onto other architects, and what is we what are we signaling across all of these platforms?

So as an example, there is an awards category which um Batesmart sponsors an award for architecture in the media. It's a useful test of this argument because it does not reward one kind of media.

Its stated purpose is to bring architecture to the attention of the general public and create awareness of architectural practice. And yet the winning work, you'll see, reveals the unresolved questions.

Is architectural media meant to distribute authority, build public understanding, preserve a canon, or advance the reputation of architects and individual practices?

So this example from 2023 national award to the deadlyans and parlay demonstrates that you can see the Australian Indigenous Design Charter on the left and a series of talks that are done frequently and consistently and published their CPDs as well, where recognition of this shows that these works don't simply make an architect or project more visible.

They change who has the authority to speak. They make First Nations knowledge and gender equity part of the professional discourse. And they give architects obligations beyond individual design authorship.

This is media producing collective capacity rather than celebrity. Um the jury citation here has awarded in twenty twenty five um the national and state awards has awarded Flo Watson's um book on March Studio and the monograph that they published.

You can see that the tension here is more difficult. They're not bad books, but what contribution to architectural history they are contributions to architectural history and knowledge, but they do reveal how architectural meaning also consolidates status.

The jury describes Mark Shuyo's book as recognizing an influential practice as a strategic point in its career. And the question is therefore not whether this practice deserves study, but why the profession's most prestigious media war repeatedly turned established architectural figures and practices into the public face of architecture.

Do they need another reward? Is the question. And then the most recent one, 2026, which was given advocacy of the digital media um you guys might already follow her, Izzy What on TikTok and Instagram, makes the contemporary problem more explicit.

The institute is now recognizing social media circulation as architectural advocacy that may be justified were it expands public architectural literacy, but it raises some other difficult questions.

What evidence separates genuine public communication from the ability to package architecture as a fast image-led content. When visibility is itself rewarded, the award risks reinforcing the same attention economy it ought to examine.

And this is up for you guys to consider. Social media, advocacy, personal brand, both. The point is not to classify the awards as good or bad in this instance, but simply to see that the categories and winners are a record of the profession's competing values.

The critical issues are advocacy, critique, and public benefit remain only one stream of recognition, while authorship, canonical reputation and market visibility remain its dominant currency.

As an example, what does media promote? So social media has not removed the gatekeeper, it has moved the gatekeeper into algorithms, engagement metrics and personal branding. Practices no longer wait to be published, they must become publishers themselves, photographers, curators and brands.

This accelerates the conversion of the architect from a member of collective profession into an individual market identity. And the result is a media culture that rewards instant legibility, visual certainty, and continual self-promotion.

It favours projects that photograph well, architects who can invest in professional imagery and publicity, and the practices already connected to awards, editors, and influential networks.

Visibility produces further visibility, and the risk is that the good architect becomes an individual architect who is published, photographed, followed, and awarded, and the band architect becomes a practice without cultural capital rather than a practice that fails as obligation to the public.

We can see that the award is not just inconsistent, it reveals three competing ideas of architecture media. Redistributing authority, preserving the canon, or generating visibility.

The problem is that the latter two often have more professional and market value than the first. And we give these examples as this is Ellenberg Fraser, who at the time designed uh this one, the Beyonce, the Premier Tower, based on Beyonce's body.

Unfortunately good. And then the A. Beckett Tower at the time won the best Overand Award for Residential Architecture. This is way before better apartment design standards.

You can see as an example, symptomatic at the time, bedrooms with no windows at all. And this and three by two point five is enough for a double bed with about three hundred or four hundred mil on either side.

So not to say that specifically Ellen Beaufraser did this more than any other well they did. They did this more than any other architectural practice. But it was lots of architectural practices were doing this.

And yet so what was being debated was the facade when they won that award. Um whether they did a good job of a bad brief. Or should they have done the bad brief to begin with.

What were people debating? It was certainly not this that balcony like if it was proportionate um yes it's not not a meter dip.

Um other examples for running architecture in this instance here you could win a five hundred dollar reader mode voucher. I mean so blatant.

So what does media promote? I think this is a really good example of that. So we're going to return to the past again, nineteen ninety nine National Presidents Forward for Architecture Australia at the start of the awards again.

Nigel Shaw questioned The problem is that the professional recognition has become organised around the reputation of the architect. Treat it as if it were the measure of actual architectural value.

Awards, magazines and social media operate as one operators, they produce visibility, convert authority, and in return you get market advantage. The result is a competition for personal distinction carried out in the name of collective professional culture.

The collective test is demanding: does this award publication or campaign make architecture more useful, equitable, publicly accountable, or does it merely make an architect more marketable?

Individual success is not evidence of collective professional health. A profession can celebrate itself, award itself, publish itself while failing to respond to big problems around housing, climate, country, labour conditions, procurement, and public trust.

And he reflects the community does not often see architecture, it sees individual architects. But we must move forward with a positive view on the value of architecture, not architects as individuals, because that will follow.

When there is too much power, too much governance, and in this case for the institute complexity, poor communication, outward action and direction, we give an example of the website court day rule which maps out companies in America and the individuals on their boardrooms.

Highlighting connections between boards. It reveals a limited number of people involved in these conversations. So you'll see here um ExxonMobil with people sitting on multiple boards.

Since this Donald fits as an example. This interconnectedness mirrors a problem in architecture. A limited number of people are involved in these conversations.

Where the same individual might dominate architecture schools, the institute, the registration board, as examples, there's an example an assumption that these groups are in conversation with feedback flowing from the profession to institution, ensuring the right discussions take place, which might not necessarily always be true.

And so Foucault's definition of various discourses provides a way to understand this network between multiple laws and bodies having established hierarchies, functional functions, and interests.

And so your diagram should be unpacking these things. What are the various discourses that inform the profession? The various institutions?

What format does it take? What regulatory decisions, laws, administrative measures? Um philosophical, moral and philanthropic propositions, just as examples.

Where does that all fit and ultimately who has more power, who has the capacity to actually make change, and otherwise what is being perpetuated.

If we return to the divided line, the main bodies of power. This idea highlights the relationship and interests of the various institutions. For example, in the Australian context, you can see AACA, the Architects Accreditation Council of Australia, the Australian Institute of Architects, the Building Authority, which is over here, the various laws and acts, which we see here, or here, and the various bodies, the universities.

We'll have the unions coming up later, and other professional bodies, which we talked about, ACA, Architeen, Professionals Australia as a union, Parliament. Like government architecture as well as who hold power and how it's held.

This conceptual frame allows us to appraise whether these ideas, approaches, processes, and operating methods function adequately to serve the public and broader profession. By interrogating architecture in this way, the architectural apparatus can be seen as a network that can be manipulated and can be transformed.

Its recognition as such further raises questions about what is defined as architectural knowledge, who forms it, how is it disseminated across this network?

What is exemplary? What is celebrated? What is published? What's distributed? And a lot of this has to be applied through the buildings to come back around to be tested as to whether or not actually can be built and affect people.

We see that perhaps the things that are missing are the social issues and the obligation to the public. You can see here as an as the exemplar, opinions, marketing, differentiation.

Repos here shows does this interconnectedness foster oversight, strategic thinking, conversations, negotiation, and consensus? Does it effectively identify anomalies, inconsistencies, irregularities, contradictions, discrepancies, divergences and disagreements, perhaps all of those things are more important than consensus.

Where are their problems to be debated? Within this system, is it within the awards? Is it within the magazines? Rather than saying this is how we're doing great, what are the issues?

Where are we making sustained change through individual projects, through individual issues? Ours are different from the past compared to now, what more work is there to be done?

Or are these bodies simply keeping the boat afloat and going about as business as usual? Are the governance structures needlessly complicated?

Can there be much more simple goals, unity, action and direction? And as something to foreshadow in the next series of lectures, we'll be considering how we shift from what we research and recognize to how we define architecture, i.e., what architecture does, what is it doing? If we concentrated our effort on productive competition, we could encourage architects in the profession to shift from what something is to what something does.

And on the left you can see, at the moment, is it fit for purpose? How architecture is manufactured and built, and traditional methods of representation, producing drawing sets.

On the right, it might be how architecture performs. And new descriptions of construction design tools, geometry, that one's quite obvious in our IT architecture anyway.

But perhaps the how architecture performs and what architecture does is less discussed. So I'll just go back a little bit But I'll just come back to this slide.

So overall, architecture media doesn't just record architecture, and I've sort of repeated the idea of what's visible, how ideas circulate, and which architects acquire professional authority is part of this ecosystem.

And recognition is necessary, practices need clients and commissions, and clients need a reason to choose one practice rather than another. And awards and publications can identify exemplary work.

They can circulate knowledge and they can just demonstrate the value of architecture. The problem begins when the visibility of individual architects is treated as a measure of architectural value.

And social media changes the process but doesn't remove it. Practices no longer need to wait, but attention is distributed unequally through algorithms, professional networks, paid promotion, visual impact and resources required to produce content continuously.

So the distinction between what architecture is and what architecture does is what we're trying to argue for. It might the award systems and media might recognize a named architect, a building type, a completed object in striking a photograph, but it might not measure long term performance, community benefit, environmental repair, improved processes, or knowledge shared across the profession.

If we envisage the profession as having a collective responsibility beyond the subject of architecture? What would it look like? What would it look like if it wasn't just about talking to the client, but to the community and the people who are not present in the room.

What would happen if we had an understanding of the profession, of the of its position within the institute's laws and media systems? What would happen if this recognition of systems served the clients, communities, and public rather than just the individual members.

What would happen if we shared knowledge from exemplary work rather than converting every idea into individual reputation? And what would happen if the capacity to distinguish between legitimate professional recognition and visibility was done through marketing rather than just the building and the individual?

And so the next lecture will extend this argument beyond media and recognition. It will talk about how architecture is made and what's recognized as innovation versus entrepreneurship.

So that's the link between this lecture and the next. So I'm now going to take a few extracts from Cameron Broom's lecture and pose a few things to you guys.

Perhaps it's uh perhaps an easier way of under understanding why architecture matters is to look at those so you will have really listened to Cameron Bruin.

He's the editor, publisher and dean of architecture and is now CEO of the Australian Institute of Architects. So few people have seen more of the professions media institutions over time than he has. And by replaying some of the extracts for discussion, it would be good for you to consider his architecture what does he think of architectural media?

What does he think it should do? Where do you agree and where might you disagree? And this is where the critique in the manifesto, which is the second assignment, and also in your diagram appears.

That people having safe, um resilient, uh and affordable housing, for example, um, as we're seeing a crisis in this country at the moment, in a incredibly rich country, an incredibly dependable democratic government in some respects, and yet we are living in a situation where we have a fundamental housing crisis.

And I don't know if you saw there was some really great data from um Anglicare that came out I think on the weekend about how difficult it is for people to find housing if they're on um you know lower incomes or government support.

Architecture matters because if people haven't got reliable housing, they can't engage in reliable work and they can't make positive contributions to society. So there's some um that's the combination of the So I think that camera starts with public value rather than the individual architect.

And I think it's worth keeping this definition in mind because we have been looking at the machinery through which architects should become visible. And does that machinery communicate this public value or does it gradually shift our attention back to the individual architect?

And I think you guys can do your own research by going through magazines and Instagram and looking at it and going, what is there? What is visible? I pulled out um extracts, you know, from forty, thirty, ten years ago, that show that this problem is perpetual.

It's often in uh needs a rebalance. Um and so it's not attention that's going to go away, but something that needs to be made aware of.

And in consuming precedents, awards, in looking at what is published, consider what's not published and what's not reflected and what you could be doing differently.

And so he prescribes who is architectural media actually for, architects, potential clients and the public. And if architecture's value is public, should the professional media be judged by how well it communicates that value?

But we would be arguing yes. And yet, if you flip through these magazines, why do architectural publications devote so much space to individual projects and individual architects?

person, is that your currency as an editor in the in the late nineties through to the m you know, I guess almost to the end almost up to the GFC in a way, up to say two thousand ten, relied on who you knew and what access to information you had that other people didn't have.

And I think it's something I talk about in the in the PhD work is that scouting g,etting the scoop, being on top of who was doing what when um and what might make for interesting content for a magazine was a really was really energetic and really uh it required a really um essentially Catholic approach, you know, being talking to lots of different architects all over the country to gat gather content.

Now of course today it's a very different world. We all know about projects because they're being posted on Instagram as site works, concept works. So the access to information is very different.

Not better and not worse, but different. So what we can see though is that magazines have survived. So there are just about as many architecture magazines in Australia in twenty twenty four as there was in two thousand and three.

But the frequency of some has have some have changed. But I think the prediction, historical predictions can be interesting because I think many people in 2010 would have said the print was dead.

There wasn't we wouldn't be printing a newspaper, we certainly wouldn't be printing magazines in ten years. But the opposite has been the case is that um magazines and newspapers as means of communication have been pretty resilient.

What it does point out, particularly if we look at the mainstream media, if if these sorts of uh media are still profitable today, imagine how profitable they were twenty years ago and the the fortunes that were built out of media.

the response to that within the architectural space was to diversify. So if you look at the trajectory of architecture media post-the GFC post-2000 2010, um It moved very quickly in a way from being a print-based quarterly or bi-monthly magazine business to a ma a business that produced those magazines, but also ran websites, ran awards programs, and ran events.

And that diversification has actually improved magazines. So in actual fact I'd argue that magazines like Architecture Australia are potentially better because they are freed from the necessity of reporting news, as it were, because we get news on our phones, on our tablets, via websites, by blogs, etc.

Um, and that a magazine can be more like itself and be more devoted to issues and long form material. We in the same way that say events do, which means that ideas being explored can be explored in a public forum, in an event or a um talk, and then become part of content in a magazine.

So it it moves around in that sort of tripart loop, I'd suggest now quite quite well. I think probably the most startling example of this um commercially is actually from the UK.

So you think of the architectural review uh magazine in the UK, which I think can lay claim to being the oldest architectural periodical. So I think it's worth thinking about editors don't simply report architecture, they've selected it, and then he goes on to talk about uh media as an ecosystem.

And so what we're really ask you is to look through these different forms of marketing, promotion, critical discourse, and to consider whether these things are true and to consider where the biases are and to consider which conversations are foregrounded or not.

And to recognize that the way you consume media is always going to have a bias and what does it link to? And to just be conscious of that when you're looking at the way architecture is promoted.

And he talks about an ecosystem where you might have a public event and it appears in print magazine. Or you might have something that goes from um where all the ins and outs of the profession are no longer you know, they're probably on LinkedIn and they're probably not in the magazine.

And then to consider whether criticism, whether research is actually in those magazines. And whether that's visible to the profession and there's for which part of that is visible to the public and whether the right conversations are being had.

Um, I think the next one he's talking about is architecture media, diversifying beyond publication into websites, awards and events. So what happens when criticism, publicity, awards and commercial activity are in the same ecosystem, are they functioning to reinforce one another or do they compromise independent criticism?

If everything is connected to one another, where can a different voice sit? This could be extremely productive, where an idea is published, debated publicly, recognized through an award and circulated internationally, or does it create a feedback loop in which the same architects' projects and values acquire increasing visibility?

And you can see that perhaps in your diagram both things can be true. And what are the safeguards to prevent one and what are the things that allow the other to happen more frequently?

Right to skip forward to the section here. With a rear view mirror. Um and the first one, um you know, since Paxton unveils his Crystal Palace in London in eighteen fifty one, um we've been dreaming as a profession of um unitized, modular, prefabricated, off site building.

And we've been dreaming of it every dreaming of it and remaking that vision more or less every decade or so since eighteen fifty one. To the point where uh, for example, in New South Wales at the moment, the government are pointing to advanced manufacturing as being the solution to the challenges that we've that we're facing in terms of um housing in the built environment.

I hate this line but it's good one. It's like if y if you keep doing things exactly the same and expect a different outcome isn't that the like that's the definition of um uh madness.

Um so we've we've you know, and we we come out of the second world war with a renewed vision based on industrialisation in the war about making refabricated buildings.

And it's just never happened. So I think at one the revision mirror here is useful to say what would need to change in architecture and construction.

And I joined them up quite provocative, you know, neatly there or deliberately there, because um Peter, as you point out, there's really been no in despite the fact that we have this incredibly efficient um construction industry in this country, um it is not viable.

So in its current format, the construction industry is not equipped to get us to the sort of a targets that we're looking for for 2050 in terms of the types of buildings that might be being built in a net zero environment.

But there's another piece to this and I have regular conversations with my colleagues at the Master Builders Association. The construction industry at the moment in terms of viability is at near crisis.

So you've got um you've got builders going broke at rapid rates, you've got builders as we observed through COVID of just not making any money because of supply issues.

So we have got a we have an inherent challenge there of a history that's not changed and of an industry that needs to radically change as a result of new horizons that didn't exist, say forty or fifty years ago or even ten years ago.

The other observation about the trajectory that the profession, Peter, I would make, is to observe that we we do make decisions whether we know it or not by our actions around the scope of the profession.

And I guess that the biggest one that we could observe within our lifetimes is the development of project management. And so I'd observe that at some point in the 60s or 70s, as a profession, we sort of decided that that was probably not our domain and we would concentrate on the things we were interested in as a profession and that sort of let that wander off.

Um to the extent that now project management is a very lucrative and important field that perhaps you would argue many would argue that it is to the detriment of the profession that that we now have that separate.

So you can see that there's an attempt to have a discussion about retrospectively what are the key issues that we should be considering, what should be discussed in the media, and I think it's worth thinking about whether any of these issues to see whether these things are visible in the media and the marketing that is consumed.

And I think it's useful at this moment to consider. No what is a professional publication and what is it supposed to do?

Is it supposed to advocate for its members and showcase practices, projects and professional achievements. Is it supposed to advance architecture, criticize building, challenge prevailing ideas, construct disciplinary knowledge or is it to serve the public and explain why architecture matters and scrutinize its social consequences which in this case he's talking about has is a problem that we've already contributed to So I think it's useful to be unpacking the things that Cameron Brun is talking about because that perhaps is not always these discussions had so readily in written format.

They probably had in um conversations. And the images and the much easier meet conversations are much easier to package up in much faster media.

I might just go to one more. To be in the same room. Um that's gonna be one last question, which is really simple one.

So the question is about um the public image of the architect. And Cameron Bruin discusses the public perception of architects as people who plan and draw, and the architect as a public intellectual.

And he uses an example during McLeod and Nightingale. As much broader forms of architectural agency. These students use something like this skip forward.

Kind of a bio statement as you might read out, it looks like it's entirely organised. That I had this idea and then that idea and then that idea and I've ended up in a job which people say, Well Cameron's been rehearsing for that job for twenty years.

Of course he's gonna do it. Um it's of course not the case. Um so I might just keep playing this so you can hear about um what his hi what his change his view his changing views of what the architect has done upon reflection over his whole career.

For me I'm a I'm a first in family student so no you know I was uh breaking out of a different cycle of a social cycle of being able to go to university.

Um I think architectural education is just about the best thing. And for me it's meant I've been able to do lots of different things in my career.

So um I g the advice I'd I'd probably give to my other uh you know, younger self is just not to worry.

And know that you will yeah an opportunity will observe if you are alert to it. I might pass it, we've got time for any extreme questions?

I think I'm saying that that's all might already be the case. Okay. Um trying to find that function. A beautiful window. Although I'm never saying we should make beautiful windows because you know that is one of the great pleasures of being an architect is to make a beautiful aperture that lets the sun in in the most perfect way.

Um I think why why you're very lucky to have um Claire and Peter guiding you through this if you're getting um lots of perspectives both around practice and around history.

And you know, my um if I hadn't been doing this job, I probably would have become an architectural historian in the university. Psychology, you know psychologists say the most reliable indicator of future behaviour is past.

If we're going to shape a future profession we really need to know where we came from and what what you know what has what has shaped it as it exists today. So you know Peter being able to talk about the fact that the that legislation was introduced in you know October nineteen twenty-two December nineteen twenty two is actually relevant.

Like these things actually have shaped who we are. I think our in a in a changing landscape of the environment. The opportunity is ours to redefine what the what's what's the shape of architectural profession and who's um who's in the tent.

And it might not be about everyone being in the same tent but building more tents and lining them up next to each other because um that to me is the you know kind of great skill of architect as orchestrator is being able to keep all of these things, all of these skills, um, all of these.

So I'll I'll stop there to say that obviously Cameron Brian is coming from the point where he believes media is doing everything that it should be doing. He has been in this world for like 40 years, so of course, you know, you can see from the inside how it's changed and the kinds of debates and conversations he's having.

What we want the critique that we have from the outside is what can we see. So there is the description that he has about having lots of different voices, having them across lots of different places, which in one way might be good, but it doesn't always make the big changes that we know the profession needs.

And understanding that ecosystem is part of how you guys diagram and understand the profession. So I might just finish up a bit early by saying that and I will have a bit more time to talk about this because I want to go through some of um the Padlets that people have been posting in.

Brune talks about architects having many forms of agency beyond designing buildings. And as a comparison, Mori High talks about architects needing to work in government, policy, institutes and systems.

Naomi talks about architects being cultural producers and public intellectuals. And Nigel Shaw, um 1999, talks about but the profession not becoming too obsessed with promoting individual architects.

Twenty years before that, Don Bailey talks about the profession existing because society grants architects trust and responsibility. All those ideas can be true and yet they can be a critique and tipping the balance of where that's most important.

Because for the majority of architects they are not seeing some of those earlier concerns. And so I asked you, which of these visions of the architect do you find most convincing?

Are these different careers or different responsibilities? And can one architect realistically embody all of these roles? And if the public only sees architects as building designers, what opportunities are being lost.

And so at the beginning of this semester we talk about how yes, building designers can do what architects do. And architects are qualified to do what building designers do, but a lot more not tested in the national competencies?

And so we're bringing these ideas together where we say competence does not equal professional judgment and professional judgment is required for a lot of these things because we're self-regulated, we're self-promoting, what are we promoting, what are we using our expertise to promote?

What is important to each other and what is important to be projecting out to the public? Yes, we've got a question. Bit bit louder? Rather than So I think you'll hear like Dariel talked about professional judgment, if you if you can remember that in her presentation, and the slides are on there from last week.

I agree that perhaps that terminology should be made more explicit in the Architects Act and regulations. And that it's sort of like reading in between the Architects Act and overlaying how professions are defined onto the Act.

I think there's probably a disconnect between that instrument as being legal and then what the ARBV can legally enforce, and then discussions around professionalism, which is not um which is defined in other social sciences, but not talked about so clearly in um the architecture profession.

It sort of comes as background. Of course, you know, if you're registered, you'd be doing the right thing. But what does, as we described, what's this right thing? And people often conflate it with you as a good person doing the right thing because you're a good person as opposed to what should the whole profession should be doing and therefore where does that term professional judgment need to appear aside from the AIB and in our kind of conversations and aside from the act.

So I can't explain to you why the word judgment's not in there historically, and perhaps that's a good question, you know, that I could ask Daryl and say, you know, where do you see the word judgment in compliance culture, and where have you drawn that from to convince the profession they need to act differently?

But what I can say of the lecture series is that this idea of overlaying professional traits onto the instruments that we use as architects is not a common way of describing it.

Does that sort of answer your question?